Be honest. You're not going to read all those books on your holiday, are you? Every year, about this time, my Instagram feed fills up with pictures of books. They’re piled somewhere between five and ten inches high, sometimes st …
Mariah Carey's Twitter account hacked on New Year's Eve Mariah Carey’s Twitter account appeared to have been hacked late Tuesday afternoon, sharing numerous racist slurs and comments with the singer’s 21.4 …
Providence Lost by Paul Lay review – the rise and fall of Oliver Cromwell’s Protectorate The only public execution of a British head of state occurred 371 years ago outside the Banqueting House in Whitehall on 30 January 1649. It was a rad …
'I'm on the hunt for humour and hope': what will authors be reading in 2020? Matt Haig I have been very dark and gloomy with my reading habits this year, perhaps in tune with the social mood. Like a pig sniffing for truffles, I …
Diary of a Murderer by Kim Young-ha review – dark stories from South Korea Given that loss of memory has become a familiar device in fiction, and the psychopath such a popular character archetype, we shouldn’t be too surprise …
TS Eliot’s intimate letters to confidante unveiled after 60 years A collection of more than 1,000 letters from the Nobel laureate TS Eliot to his confidante and muse Emily Hale is unveiled this week, after having bee …
Woodford folk festival review – a much-needed moment of positivity and reprieve If Woodford folk festival was in mourning this year, you wouldn’t have known it. The death in May of festival elder and decade-long patron Bob Hawke c …
The Other Half of Augusta Hope by Joanna Glen review – high emotions Summary: Who is Augusta Hope’s “other half”? In Glen’s debut, shortlisted for the Costa first novel prize, at first it’s Augusta’s twin sister, although the di …
Tara Erraught/James Baillieu review – quietly intense and simply exquisite Irish mezzo Tara Erraught’s latest Wigmore recital with her pianist James Baillieu took place between Christmas and New Year, though her beautifully c …
The Reality Bubble by Ziya Tong review – blind spots and hidden truths Publishing functions very much like the fashion world. Like a suddenly ubiquitous cut of hem or style of trainer, a book comes along every few seasons …
MC Beaton, multimillion-selling author of Agatha Raisin novels, dies aged 83 MC Beaton, the prolific creator of the much loved fictional detectives Agatha Raisin and Hamish Macbeth, has died after a short illness at the age of …
Meaty by Samantha Irby review – scatological essays To call Samantha Irby’s book scatological would be an understatement. This is a book about assholes – yes, the kind who cheats on you, or never calls, …
TS Eliot’s hidden love letters reveal intense, heartbreaking affair Summary: TS Eliot’s love letters to scholar Emily Hale, the great poet’s muse and source of “supernatural ecstasy” for more than 30 years, were released on Thu …
'I was half-insane with anxiety': how I wrote myself into a breakdown Summary: Last summer, in the midst of promotional chaos surrounding my new novel The Offing, I cancelled my own London book launch and instead drove to the Cha …
How the Brain Lost Its Mind review – beyond hysteria The history of medicine abounds with oddball characters and bizarre events. Yet few figures are quite as eccentric as the French neurologist Jean-Mart …
'Do something weird that works on TikTok': how to write a pop smash in 2020 Landing a No 1 single was a little different at the beginning of the 2010s than it is now. The songwriting and production team TMS – who have achieved …
Nietzsche and the Burbs review – deadpan philosophical comedy Lars Iyer’s follow-up to the celebrated Wittgenstein Jr is another attempt to treat his erstwhile academic specialism, European philosophy, as the bas …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Raye, Usher, Lil Uzi Vert Raye Please Don’t Touch You heard it here first: London pop star Rachel Keen, AKA Raye, is the artist most likely to “do a Dua” in 2020 and make the l …
Lost in muzak: how ambient became cool When Wire, a nightclub in Leeds city centre, recently announced its first residency, it came with a calm-inducing addition: ambient listening sessions …
The Living Days by Ananda Devi review – a tale of exploitation First published in France in 2013, The Living Days is the 12th novel by the Mauritian author Ananda Devi. Set in London, it tells of the sexual abuse …
Architecture in Global Socialism by Łukasz Stanek review – a book that rewrites the cold war If you rummage through boxes of postcards in Polish secondhand shops, they reveal an unexpected geography – places few Poles would now go. They’re not …
Mystery of Rolling Stones tracks posted briefly on YouTube A mysterious YouTube account that posted, then hid, a collection of 75 rare and unpublished Rolling Stones recordings may have been a canny attempt to …
The Death of Jesus by JM Coetzee review – a boy who challenges the world Martin Amis once complained that JM Coetzee had “got no talent”, showing perhaps that obsessive ranking of talent (here used in a far more debased sen …
Braised Pork by An Yu review – a startlingly original debut Weird things keep happening in An Yu’s debut novel, Braised Pork. First, a Beijing businessman drowns in a bathtub. Later, a fish tank goes up in flam …
Humiliation by Paulina Flores review – empathetic short stories In this impressive debut, nimbly translated by Megan McDowell, Flores explores the indignities of poverty, widespread in her native Chile. In the priz …
Vigdis Hjorth: ‘I won’t talk about my family… I’m in enough trouble’ Summary: “Most families have a kind of official family story,” Vigdis Hjorth says. “‘This is how we do Christmas’, and so on. If one member does not share this …
White romance novelist in racism row says she was used A white romance novelist’s ethics complaint against the author Courtney Milan for calling her book a “racist mess” led to the censure of Milan and spa …
Book clinic: what are the best titles to help us through tough times? Summary: Q: Can you recommend books to help us through tough times – books about how to persevere under difficult circumstances? Angela Robertson, 50, Edinburg …
Joseph O’Connor: ‘A prize nomination brings out your inner Gollum’ Irish novelist Joseph O’Connor is the author of 18 books, including the bestselling Star of the Sea. His most recent, Shadowplay, won novel of the yea …
Obituary: Alexander Frater 1937-2020 Alexander Frater, the chief travel writer of the Observer from 1986 to 1998 and the author of highly successful travel books, including Chasing the Mo …
In the Dream House by Carmen Maria Machado – review “You’re not allowed to write about this… Don’t you ever write about this. Do you fucking understand me?” So said Carmen Maria Machado’s ex-girlfriend …
Pavel Kolesnikov review – an outstanding pianist in every degree Dusk to Dawn was the title of Pavel Kolesnikov‘s latest Wigmore recital, a superb, wonderfully programmed evening that more than confirmed the London- …
In brief: On the Up; How to Be an Activist; The Silent Patient – reviews Summary: On the Up Alice O’Keeffe Hodder & Stoughton, £16.99, pp336 Sylvia lives with her partner and two children in a run-down block of flats in east London. …
Nicola Roberts: ‘My therapist said I was one of the most resilient people she’d ever met’ Last year was one of the happiest of Nicola Roberts’ life. She signed off on the repossession of her home in Surrey and moved to London, close to frie …
The Great Pretender by Susannah Cahalan review – psychologist in the dock There are precious few biological tests for mental disorders, so diagnosis still rests on the observation of symptoms. Susannah Cahalan’s first book, …
Little Lulu: Working Girl by John Stanley review – riot girl in a little red dress I must admit that I knew nothing of Little Lulu until Drawn & Quarterly sent me the first volume of its full-colour reissue of her adventures (five ar …
Nirvana reunion: Dave Grohl's 13-year-old daughter steals the show Summary: When arts charity the Art of Elysium announced the lineup for its annual Heaven Is Rock and Roll Gala in Los Angeles, the attention was on the second …
American Dirt by Jeanine Cummins review – panic and pathos on the run from the cartel At the opening of Jeanine Cummins’s devastating and timely novel, bookshop owner Lydia and her eight-year-old son, Luca, are the only survivors of a t …
Poem of the week: House by Robert Browning House I Shall I sonnet-sing you about myself? Do I live in a house you would like to see? Is it scant of gear, has it store of pelf? “Unlock my heart …
MC Beaton obituary The best known pseudonym of the crime writer Marion Chesney Gibbons, who has died aged 83, was MC Beaton, although she also wrote as Jennie Tremaine, …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. Let’s start with a success for captainlego who bought …
Jonathan Coe wins Costa prize for ‘perfect’ Brexit novel Jonathan Coe’s portrait of a Britain torn apart by the Brexit referendum, Middle England, has won the Costa novel award, described by judges as the pe …
Lizzo's Sydney Opera House performance was as close to transcendent as pop can get Summary: The floor rumbles as more than 2,000 people stamp their feet, raise their arms and bow down in unison as they chant the name “Lizzo”. I find myself wi …
'Nobody in Tesco buys spy books by women': how female authors took on the genre When Stella Rimington, the former director general of MI5 and spy author, wrote a new foreword last year to The Spy’s Bedside Book, Graham Greene and …
Such a Fun Age by Kiley Reid – charming, authentic, entertaining Summary: At the start of Kiley Reid’s standout first novel, a security guard accosts a young black babysitter as she strolls the aisles of an upscale Philadelp …
Hans Zimmer hired to score Bond film No Time to Die at last minute Hans Zimmer has been drafted in as a last-minute replacement to score the James Bond movie No Time to Die, less than three months before its release. …
Romantic fiction awards cancelled after racism row prompts mass boycott The US’s most prestigious awards for romance writing, the Ritas, have been cancelled after a host of judges and entrants pulled out over an ongoing ra …
Letter: Julian Piper obituary In 1998 Julian Piper invited us to go and interview the American blues guitarist Phil Guy, who was staying with him at his home in Topsham, Devon. Phi …
Half of a Yellow Sun summons a gilded age as well as an atrocious war There’s an agonising social exchange towards the end of the first part of Half of a Yellow Sun. Richard, a British man, is talking to a Nigerian poet …
Jasper Griffin obituary The classicist Jasper Griffin, who has died aged 82 of pneumonia, is best known for his work on the Iliad and the Odyssey, ancient Greek epic poems th …
One of Us Is Next by Karen M McManus review – a thrilling sequel Given the tragic toll of shootings at US high schools, it might seem insensitive to set a new murder thriller subgenre in these painful spaces. But Ka …
Doors drummer John Densmore: ‘It took me years to forgive Jim Morrison’ It took the Doors’ drummer, John Densmore, three years to visit the grave of his bandmate Jim Morrison after he was found dead in a Paris bathtub in 1 …
Musical notes: Justin Bieber's TikTok-friendly Yummy is too eager to go viral Summary: Pop and rock music, in its multifarious forms, seems to shift faster than ever. In 2020, we’re bombarded not just with music – more of which is readil …
Three Hours by Rosamund Lupton review – 180 nail-biting minutes Rosamund Lupton’s new novel opens on a “moment of stillness; as if time itself is waiting, can no longer be measured”. This infinitesimal pause is fol …
Top 10 books about toxic masculinity Toxic masculinity has become something of a buzz phrase, employed to describe and explain everything from poor dating etiquette to mass shootings and …
Stephen Hough/Castalian Quartet review – ensemble and balance were spot-on Stephen Hough’s three-concert residency at the Wigmore Hall this week is built around chamber works by Brahms. Its centrepiece was a programme of two …
UK drill rapper Headie One jailed for six months for carrying knife Headie One, the Tottenham rapper who has had chart success with Stormzy and Dave, has been sentenced to six months in prison for carrying a knife. The …
With Prozac Nation, Elizabeth Wurtzel blew open the memoir as we know it ‘I Hate Myself and I Want to Die.” With the title of her prologue Elizabeth Wurtzel starts as she means to go on. Prozac Nation, published just over 2 …
Haunts of the Black Masseur author Charles Sprawson dies aged 78 Charles Sprawson, author of the cult swimming classic Haunts of the Black Masseur, has died at the age of 78. The news was announced by Sprawson’s fri …
A Case of Exploding Mangoes 'targeted by authorities after Urdu translation' Copies of a decade-old, Booker-longlisted satire about the death of Pakistan’s military dictator General Zia ul-Haq has been seized in a raid on the o …
Wiley v Stormzy: sparks fly in grime's generation game For many of us, January is a time to reset, exercise, and get mind and body in order for the start of a new year. But someone who clearly hasn’t downl …
Instead of celebrating Adele's weight loss, may I suggest something else? Adele may have dubious views on tax, but one thing is for certain: the rest of her resume is nearly flawless. Her first album, some of which she wrote …
Two new David Bowie records to be released in 2020 Two new David Bowie records will be released this year, with a digital EP featuring unheard versions of songs being released weekly and a live session …
A World Without Work by Daniel Susskind review – should we be delighted or terrified? Oscar Wilde dreamed of a world without work. In The Soul of Man Under Socialism (1891) he imagined a society liberated from drudgery by the machine: “ …
The Doll by Ismail Kadare review – a fascinating study of difficult love At first acquaintance, Ismail Kadare’s autobiographical novel can be read as an elegant, slightly bittersweet coming-of-age memoir, touched with nosta …
The Way We Eat Now by Bee Wilson review – strategies for eating in a world of change In recent years, how and what we eat has been transformed. “These changes are written on the land, on our bodies and on our plates,” Wilson writes. Th …
The Clash's 40 greatest songs – ranked! 40. 1977 (1977) A historical artefact, not for the proto-punk music, but because the lyrics epitomise the new wave’s perceived threat to the old guard …
Good Husbandry by Kristin Kimball review – a new life on a community farm Kristin Kimball was a freelance writer living in New York when, at the age of 31, she went to interview an idealistic young organic farmer in Pennsylv …
Georgia: Seeking Thrills review – a bold British hymn to hedonism The photo on the cover of Georgia Barnes’s second album seems telling. At first glance, it looks like one of those classic late 80s/early 90s club sho …
Beethoven: The Late Quartets review – serene and assured performances Summary: The Brodsky Quartet have taken their time over the Beethoven quartets. In 2006, they released a disc of two of the Rasumovsky quartets, Opp 59 Nos 2 a …
Keeley Forsyth: how the Happy Valley actor became the new Scott Walker Yorkshire is the backdrop to many disquieting works of art, such as David Peace’s Red Riding Quartet, Bram Stoker’s Dracula and the Brontës’ explorati …
Marianne Crebassa/Fazıl Say review – singer and pianist in creative harmony A standard vocal recital has the singer stealing the limelight from an all too often anonymous pianist, and the repertoire lightening up towards the e …
Harry Kupfer obituary Harry Kupfer, who has died aged 84, was a towering figure in opera production with a career spanning 60 years. A native of Berlin, for the first two d …
'Weirdos' in No 10: the magic touch this government needs? This week the government said that Boris Johnson’s chief adviser, Dominic Cummings, would not be able to bypass civil service recruitment processes in …
‘People are so happy we exist’: indie bookshops grow despite retail slump James Ashmore admits that he and his wife Louise “had a good five minutes of just smelling all the books” when the stock arrived for their new indepen …
John le Carré wins $100,000 prize for 'contribution to democracy' John le Carré has been named the latest recipient of the $100,000 (£76,000) Olof Palme prize, an award given for an “outstanding achievement” in the s …
DaBaby boom: meet the controversial rapper taking over America It’s impossible to know where to focus your attention. On the six members of Jabbawockeez, the dance troupe wriggling on stage like breakdancing storm …
David Lang: why I freed Fidelio's other prisoners I was in my early 20s when I first saw Fidelio, Beethoven’s only opera, on stage. I didn’t know that much about it. I knew the rough plot – a woman, L …
Threshold by Rob Doyle review – a wild journey About halfway through Rob Doyle’s third book, a writer and philosopher, who might exist as a fictional character, or only as a briefly assumed disguis …
The Big Moon: Walking Like We Do review – endlessly quotable indie-pop Endearing indie outfits announcing that they’re going pop is rarely cause for celebration. The sense that they feel strong-armed into it by commercial …
The Great Pretender by Susannah Cahalan review – psychiatry’s dubious past Summary: What does it take to be thought of as mentally ill? According to one of the most famous studies in psychiatry, very little. In 1973, the journal Scien …
Poppy: I Disagree review – online pop-bot embraces IRL nu-metal Moriah Pereira, AKA Poppy, emerged in 2014 as a YouTube sensation, pitched as a fictional character: a video of her eating candy floss garnered over t …
Tsitsi Dangarembga: ‘Reading Toni Morrison’s Beloved changed my life’ The book I am currently reading I opened Namwali Serpell’s The Old Drift to give me a Zambian perspective. The book that changed my life Reading Toni …
Field Music: Making a New World review – war stories with disco-pop sensibilities Summary: This 40-minute, 19-song cycle about the aftermath of the first world war isn’t the most obvious commercial follow-up to Field Music’s glorious 2018 To …
Beatles' Abbey Road tops US bestselling vinyl LPs of the 2010s The Beatles’ 1969 album Abbey Road has been named the US’s biggest-selling vinyl LP of the 2010s, shifting more than 558,000 copies. The Top 10, compi …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Justin Bieber, Travis Scott, Hatsune Miku Summary: Justin Bieber Yummy There’s something about one-time child stars named Justin that makes them incapable of getting married without releasing at least …
Carmen Maria Machado: ‘I wished that I had a police report, or a black eye' Carmen Maria Machado is by temperament a fiction writer and writing In the Dream House, her memoir of surviving an abusive relationship, was in some w …
The best recent science fiction and fantasy – review roundup Danny Tobey’s second novel, The God Game (Gollancz, £16.99), is a fast-paced satirical techno-thriller examining the fault lines of morality within a …
Don Winslow and Stephen King offer $200K if White House holds a press briefing Bestselling novelists Stephen King and Don Winslow have offered to donate $200,000 (£153,000) to a children’s hospital if the White House press secret …
Gift of the gabber: the return of dance music’s gloriously tasteless subgenre Summary: “Strictly for the headstrong!” bellowed the rave MCs back in 92. In contrast to the smiles and hugs of acid house, the music, the dancing, the drugs w …
Neil Gaiman leads Hampshire writers protesting against library cuts Summary: Hampshire’s most famous literary resident, Jane Austen, must be spinning in her grave at the council’s mooted plans to close up to 14 of the county’s …
Elizabeth Wurtzel obituary “I was born with a mind that is compromised by preternatural unhappiness,” wrote Elizabeth Wurtzel in 2013, “and I might have died very young or done …
Rush drummer and lyricist Neil Peart dies at 67 The Rush drummer and lyricist Neil Peart has died at the age of 67. The Canadian musician had been diagnosed with brain cancer three years ago and die …
Rush's Neil Peart: unassuming, thunderous drummer who became a music legend “He was one of the goofiest-looking guys I’d ever seen,” Geddy Lee told me in November 2018. Rush’s singer and bass player was talking about his first …
You’re Not Listening by Kate Murphy review – a modern epidemic of self-absorbed talk Summary: In 2005 I sat opposite someone at a dinner party who spent much of the evening looking at her phone under the table, sending messages and smiling to h …
The Other Bennet Sister by Janice Hadlow review – what happened to Mary after Pride and Prejudice Janice Hadlow’s first novel explores the predicament of Mary, the overlooked middle daughter of the Bennet household in Pride and Prejudice. Mary does …
William Gibson: ‘I was losing a sense of how weird the real world was' In 2016, William Gibson was a third of the way through his new novel when Donald Trump was elected president of the United States. “I woke up the day …
Mura Masa: the Stormzy collaborator on why he’s swapped sunny pop for moody nostalgia In a cramped south London rehearsal space, producer Mura Masa, AKA Alex Crossan, is quietly losing the plot. Takeaway boxes and empty bottles rest on …
Echoes of the City by Lars Saabye Christensen review – sacrifice and strength in postwar Oslo Acclaim for Lars Saabye Christensen, both in his native Norway and in translation, has ranked him alongside Karl Ove Knausgård, Jon Fosse and Hanne Ør …
Backstop Land by Glenn Patterson review – the 'unreal' Brexit era A spectre is haunting the imaginations of liberal left commentators on both sides of the Irish Sea – the spectre of BBHS. The acronym stands for “Bord …
The week in classical: NYO/Martín; Stephen Hough review – a flying start to 2020 The classical music world wakes slowly in January. Orchestral concerts don’t get going properly until mid-month and most halls are quiet, a noble, ope …
Georgia: Seeking Thrills review – thrills without the spills Summary: On paper, Seeking Thrills, the second album by London producer and vocalist Georgia Barnes, has all the makings of a very Veganuary sort of dance-pop …
Travel in time with HG Wells … inside his favourite library Behind the leather spines that line the bookshelves of the London Library lie pages that have inspired some of the English language’s most influential …
Sulzmann/ Iles/ Holland: Lush Life review – a joyous meeting of minds There’s a rare unanimity of thought when saxophonist Stan Sulzmann and pianist Nikki Iles play together. The way they latch on to one another’s ideas …
Pippi Longstocking: can the world’s strongest girl conquer Britain? She heaves a circus strongman above her head and tosses policemen into bushes, vanquishes hapless burglars and wrongfoots the uptight, bourgeois woman …
Jo Nesbø: ‘We should talk about violence against women’ Summary: The Norwegian crime writer Jo Nesbø, 59, has sold more than 33m books worldwide and won a host of prizes, including the prestigious Glass Key for best …
Brit award nominations 2020: Dave and Lewis Capaldi top pile, with women shut out The British music industry’s focus on the male solo artist at the expense of female musicians has been thrown into sharp relief by the nominations for …
This year's male-dominated Brit awards have an issue with women You could say this year’s Brit nominations are as predictable as ever. It didn’t take astonishing powers of clairvoyance to predict that Lewis Capaldi …
Square Haunting by Francesca Wade review – female autonomy between the wars When Dorothy L Sayers’s fictional mystery writer Harriet Vane returns from her adventures in Europe, she takes up residence in a one-bedroom flat in M …
The Big Moon: Walking Like We Do review – indie crew grow their sound There was certainly no shortage of competent and unimaginative indie rock in the late 2010s. But the debut album by the Big Moon – 2017’s Love in the …
Race, literature, lovers ... and fake breasts: my chats with Elizabeth Wurtzel Summary: Pop culture loves the hot mess: a female character – real or otherwise – hurtling from one improbable drama to the next. She is gregarious and oversha …
The Weight of a Piano by Chris Cander review – tale of transgenerational trauma Summary: Belongings are useful to novelists, for obvious reasons. They can be hoarded, handed on, lost, stolen, used instrumentally or inappropriately and, mos …
This Mournable Body by Tsitsi Dangarembga review – life on the precipice “You want nothing more than to break away from the implacable terror of every day you spend in your country – where you can no longer afford the odd d …
Field Music: Making a New World review – a concept stronger than the songs A concept album viewing the last century through the filter of the first world war, Field Music’s seventh album was initially composed and performed b …
Hatsune Miku review – hologram star fires up crowdsourced power pop On Saturday night, a singer with a 13-year career played only her second London headline show. Naturally, the venue was packed out with rapt, merchand …
In brief: Kingdomtide; The Other Half of Augusta Hope; The Squiggly Career – reviews Kingdomtide Rye Curtis Fourth Estate, £12.99, pp336 A strangely compelling debut novel, Kingdomtide begins when the elderly – but never frail – Cloris …
Himalayan headbangers: in the moshpit with the metalheads of Kathmandu When Ugra Karma made the first-ever Nepali metal recording, they didn’t intend to start a subculture. They just wanted to make life easier for themsel …
Neil Peart obituary The drummer Neil Peart, who has died aged 67 of brain cancer, enjoyed such a reputation for his deft, powerful drumming with the Canadian rock band Ru …
Letter: Paul Birkbeck obituary The artist Paul Birkbeck was also interested in American roots music. During the mid-1960s he played the banjo with the Dedicated Men Jugband. Their r …
Vijay Iyer: Ritual Ensemble review – thrilling curveballs from Harvard's best Vijay Iyer introduced the Ritual Ensemble’s concert in his Wigmore Hall composer-in-residence series by observing: “We all have an affiliation with Ha …
You’re Not Listening review – why we must listen to our opponents The premise of this book couldn’t be more timely, although the idea is also frighteningly easy to dismiss. There is a temptation to retreat into comfo …
Day6 review – powerpop and positive energy from frenetic k-rockers Summary: Sympathy is extended to Day6 fans who arrive too late to bag a spot at the front of the queue. By 7am on Sunday, 100 determined MyDays – the collectiv …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. To start, “a gorgeous book hiding in plain sight”. Syd …
La Bohème review – exuberant and persuasive revival performed with elan There are Puccini operas that some of us might not miss never seeing again. But La Bohème is incontrovertibly not one of them. One takes a seat for La …
British-Trinidadian dub poet Roger Robinson wins TS Eliot prize Roger Robinson, the British-Trinidadian dub poet, has won the prestigious TS Eliot prize on his first nomination for his collection A Portable Paradis …
Australian fiction is already challenging the idea that catastrophic bushfire is normal Fifteen years ago the renowned nature writer Robert Macfarlane lamented “the deficiency of a creative response” to climate crisis. Novels, art, music, …
James Blunt: how we made You're Beautiful Summary: James Blunt, singer-songwriter I’d been telling my mates that I was going to be a professional musician since I was 14. When I was a captain in the Br …
Young adult books round-up – review The new year kicks off with sequels from two of the biggest names in young adult fiction. Nigerian-American Tomi Adeyemi is rumoured to have earned a …
How Alan Partridge helped Come Out Ye Black and Tans top the charts In the streaming age, the first singles charts of the new year are reliably predictable. Out goes the Christmas music; back in flood the familiar face …
Cher Lloyd: ‘After The X Factor, I had to do damage control. I still have to’ Summary: About a year ago, Cher Lloyd was shopping in the Disney Store on Oxford Street when she was approached by a new fan: a middle-aged man who told her th …
Half of a Yellow Sun is a masterpiece in balancing truth and fiction Summary: Last year, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie gave the inaugural Gabriel García Márquez lecture and spoke about truth and storytelling. “To start a story, a tru …
Wang and Capuçon review –  a dazzling display electrifies Chopin and Franck Summary: A pair of stars don’t necessarily make for a great musical duo, but something seems to have clicked for cellist Gautier Capuçon and pianist Yuja Wang. …
Is Billie Eilish too cool for the James Bond franchise? Summary: No Time to Die already has a lot going for it. It’s got an exciting director, a promising trailer and – if it adheres to the good/bad/good/bad pattern …
Stephen King faces backlash over comments on Oscars diversity In yet another year of Oscar nominations that saw a paucity of recognition for women and artists of colour, the response has been almost exhausted – a …
150m Shades of Grey: how the decade's runaway bestseller changed our sex lives I was working as a bookseller when Fifty Shades of Grey was published and spent weeks stacking shelves with the glossy tomes, only for them to be whis …
Anna Calvi: live music venues deserve as much help as ballet or opera Summary: Britain’s independent music venues should receive the same reverence and support as the ballet or opera, according to the musician Anna Calvi and the …
Uncanny Valley: A Memoir by Anna Wiener review – beggars and tech billionaires When Anna Wiener first moved to San Francisco for a job at a web analytics startup, she rented a room on Airbnb and found herself captivated by the id …
Leave Rihanna alone! A manifesto for healthier pop fandom in the 2020s In the final days of December, speculation that Rihanna might be about to release her ninth album, known among fans simply as R9, entered overdrive. D …
In the Dream House review – a raw account of an abusive lesbian relationship “Memory itself is a form of architecture”: the American writer Carmen Maria Machado quotes Louise Bourgeois at the beginning of this book. How then do …
Jak Kilby obituary My friend Jak Kilby, who has died aged 72, was a freelance photographer who documented the early years of the free jazz and free improvisation scene i …
Tom Watson’s betrayal thriller – and other politicians who vent in fiction Summary: Fresh from publishing his guide to weight loss, Downsizing, the former deputy leader of the Labour party, Tom Watson, is set to write a political thri …
The Hidden History of Burma by Thant Myint-U review – dashed hopes When Thant Myint-U was eight he travelled from the US to Burma with his parents to bury his grandfather U Thant, the first non-European secretary gene …
Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 2020: Whitney Houston, Depeche Mode and more inducted The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, self-appointed definers of the pop music canon, have announced the artists being inducted for 2020. A group of more th …
Gold singer: Billie Eilish v Shirley Bassey – who is more Bond? James Bond is getting on a bit – the first film came out 58 years ago – but it seems his latest adventure will still sound fresh, with the 18-year-old …
Of Cats and Elfins by Sylvia Townsend Warner review – charming fantasies This collects several pieces of Warner’s short fantasy fiction, from 1929 to 1976. Each tale is a beautifully realised imaginative world, resonant wit …
Courteeners: More. Again. Forever. review – fighting the death of indie Just before Christmas, the Official Charts Company published the Top 100 biggest-selling singles and albums of the 2010s. If you needed evidence of th …
A Long Petal of the Sea by Isabel Allende review – a sweeping historical saga Isabel Allende’s 23rd book begins in the furnace of the Spanish civil war, where trainee doctor Victor Dalmau is holding a human heart between his han …
Anthony Bourdain's final book to be published this year The final book by renowned chef, travel writer and television host Anthony Bourdain will be published in October, more than two years after he killed …
Tickbox by David Boyle review – thinking inside the box Automation in the modern world is usually thought of as done by robots or creepily intelligent software, but it is also the way, as this feistily inte …
Midas touch: how to create the perfect James Bond song Summary: Goldfinger opens with a shot of a floating fake duck that turns out to be attached to a wetsuit-clad Sean Connery as James Bond. He clambers out of th …
Xenobot: how did earth's newest lifeforms get their name? This week scientists announced that they had created the first living robots by building machines using stem cells taken from African frogs. So far th …
From Meghan Markle to Princess Margaret: books to understand the royal family If you have been fretting about the “unprecedented” royal rumpus, then relax. The good news is that it has all happened before and, what’s more, it ha …
Political rockers Algiers: 'The US is in a complete spiral and collapse' Last February, Algiers released one of the most extraordinary tracks of 2019. Can the Sub_Bass Speak? was a five-minute collage of free-jazz sax, drum …
Various: London Is the Place for Me: The Music of Young Black London, Vols 7 & 8 review – joyous blends Creole languages and culture can be loosely defined as those that have been mixed: a natural blending of influences over time to create a new hybridit …
Mac Miller: Circles review – late rapper still pushing hip-hop's boundaries Mac Miller died in September 2018, just weeks after releasing his fifth album, Swimming. A languid and lightly funky rap record, it combined rich, sop …
Halsey: Manic review – takes confessional pop to the next level Summary: From the depressed self-medication documented in the emo-rap scene to the soul-baring by the likes of Ariana Grande and Selena Gomez, we’re living in …
Sara Collins: ‘I can’t even start James Joyce’s Ulysses, let alone finish it' Summary: The book I’m currently reading A Tall History of Sugar by Curdella Forbes. Set in mid-20th century Jamaica, it tells the story of Moshe Fisher, a boy …
Bombay Bicycle Club: Everything Else Has Gone Wrong review – songs to buy a mid-range hatchback to Even when reunions are no longer surprising but inevitable, Bombay Bicycle Club’s return is striking: just four years after they split, here is a fift …
Grammys chief Deborah Dugan suspended after misconduct allegation Deborah Dugan, president and chief executive of the Recording Academy, which organises the Grammy awards, has been suspended following an accusation o …
070 Shake: Modus Vivendi review – paranoid jams and futuristic gospel 070 Shake has a voice that sounds invincible. The world first heard it when she was plucked from comparative obscurity to sing on Kanye West’s haphaza …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Dream Nails, Tame Impala, Georgia Dream Nails Text Me Back (Chirpse Degree Burns) Millennial culture is crying out for a horror franchise called Two Blue Ticks. This generation’s Blair …
Slipknot review – a haven of euphoric noise in a world gone mad It’s 21 years since Slipknot blazed out of Iowa with their eponymous debut album and a striking USP. Their horror masks tapped into the movie-viewing …
Discworld fans are right to be nervous about the BBC's 'punk rock' The Watch We Terry Pratchett fans have been lucky in recent years. We were given Good Omens, which thanks to co-author Neil Gaiman’s shepherding and incredible …
Philharmonia/Salonen review – Turnage gets the horn Summary: Towards Alba, Mark-Anthony Turnage’s new horn concerto, was written for Richard Watkins, who gave its premiere with the Philharmonia under Esa-Pekka S …
Sci-fi magazine pulls story by trans writer after 'barrage of attacks' A science fiction story that repurposed the transphobic meme “I Sexually Identify as an Attack Helicopter” as its title has been removed from the maga …
Eminem faces backlash after comparing himself to Manchester Arena bomber Eminem has been criticised after comparing himself to the Manchester Arena suicide bomber. His track Unaccommodating, taken from his new album Music t …
Wordsworth treasures donated to poet's Lake District home A treasure trove of newly discovered items belonging to William Wordsworth, one of England’s greatest poets, have been given to his Lake District home …
The Age of Illusions review: anti-anti-Trump but for … what, exactly? Winston Churchill supposedly said: “Americans will always do the right thing, only after they have tried everything else.” In his new book, Andrew Bac …
Thank you book Twitter – you are so much nicer than Netflix Twitter I got a new tattoo this week, and one of the things that came up with the man I’d trusted to ink my shoulder was how Netflix has changed the ways we t …
The Shadow King by Maaza Mengiste review – remembering Ethiopia’s female soldiers Summary: The eponymous king in Maaza Mengiste’s second novel does not feature until a good halfway through the narrative, and then in appropriately shadowy fas …
Jacqueline Woodson: ‘It’s important to know that whatever moment we’re in, it's not the first time' Author Jacqueline Woodson lives in a quintessential Brooklyn brownstone with her partner, two children, a cat and two huge, friendly dogs. A similar h …
The week in classical: La bohème; Nature Unwrapped review – from the garret to the stars Summary: Each encounter with Puccini’s La bohème – assuming the performance is up to scratch, which the Royal Opera’s latest revival is – makes you rethink the …
One to watch: Hatis Noit The word “spellbinding” has been liberally daubed over everything from reviews of the musical Wicked to every album Bon Iver has ever released (and do …
Mac Miller: Circles review – a last look inward for a complex talent Mac Miller’s narrative arc was genuinely surprising. A capable but derivative white rapper from Pittsburgh with neck tattoos, his early works about pa …
Citizen Bravo, Raymond MacDonald and Friends: Return to Y’Hup: The World of Ivor Cutler review – charming tribute to a national treasure Surveying Rip It Up, the National Museum of Scotland’s 2018 celebration of Caledonian pop, Matt Brennan and Raymond MacDonald noted a conspicuous abse …
Julian Lloyd Webber: I’ll  quit top music job over arts cash cuts Julian Lloyd Webber, the former virtuoso cellist, is to step down from his job as principal of Birmingham’s music conservatoire if a block on national …
Maaza Mengiste: ‘The language of war is always masculine’ Maaza Mengiste’s second novel, The Shadow King, is a reimagination of Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia. Told from a range of perspectives, it focuses on t …
Book clinic: excellent shorter novels Q: I feel I miss out on a lot of good fiction because I struggle to read longer books. Please could you recommend some excellent shorter novels? Teach …
Richard Layard: ‘It's in politicians' self-interest to make policies for happiness’ Is happiness, which we think of as fleeting, a realistic state to which to aspire? I think happiness is what people most care about. They want to know …
Mura Masa: Raw Youth Collage review – confused and bitty You can’t accuse the 23-year-old Guernsey producer Mura Masa of false advertising. Raw Youth Collage, his second album, is bitty and a little raw – no …
Neneh Cherry: ‘Rap is a kind of freedom’ One of BBC Four’s recent Top of the Pops reruns from the late 1980s features a performance that many of us who were young girls at the time vividly re …
Adults by Emma Jane Unsworth review – trenchant satire of screen addiction Summary: Emma Jane Unsworth’s virtuoso new novel is far too canny to convey anything so gauche as a “message”, but if it did, it would be this: step away from …
Grown Ups by Marian Keyes – one big happy family? The Caseys are a sprawling Irish family who gather at every possible opportunity: anniversaries, birthdays and holidays. Brothers Johnny, Ed and Liam …
Grit Orchestra/Celtic Connections review – filmic fusion from an 80-strong band Glasgow’s annual roots music jamboree Celtic Connections may have only just launched but the breakout star of the 27th edition has already emerged. A …
In brief: The Teacher; Ladies Can’t Climb Ladders; Liar – reviews Summary: The Teacher Michal Ben-Naftali (trans Daniella Zamir) Open Letter, £12.99, pp138 This spare, enigmatic novella seizes from the start. It’s a fictional …
070 Shake: Modus Vivendi review – an impressive statement of intent Among the few highlights from Kanye West’s 2018 album, ye, were two features from emerging New Jersey artist Danielle Balbuena – known by the moniker …
Street Scene review – full justice for murder in Manhattan First performed in Philadelphia in 1946 before a Broadway transfer the following year, Street Scene, now given a fine new production by Opera North, i …
The age of the individual must end – our world depends on it Last month, as I travelled to see family for a very mild Christmas in the UK, I thought about the bushfires simultaneously raging across Australia. Th …
Pills, Powder and Smoke by Antony Loewenstein; Say Why to Drugs by Dr Suzi Gage – review There are two key problems with books that attempt to be objective about illegal drugs. The first is that for the most part their authors won’t admit …
A Pushkin theme park? How about Discworld World, StephenKingLand … There are lovers of fairytales and lovers of Russian literature and lovers of theme parks, and sometimes, just sometimes, everyone’s wishes can be met …
Poem of the week: Harlem Shadows by Claude McKay Summary: Harlem Shadows I hear the halting footsteps of a lass In Negro Harlem when the night lets fall Its veil. I see the shapes of girls who pass To bend an …
Jimmy Heath, jazz saxophonist for Miles Davis and more, dies aged 93 Jimmy Heath, the US jazz performer and composer whose career spanned seven decades, has died of natural causes aged 93. His death was confirmed to the …
States of the Body Produced By Love by Nisha Ramayya review – a difficult beginning Nisha Ramayya’s collection, States of the Body Produced By Love, is a thorny debut, though containing sustained flashes of brilliance. Fans of Maggie …
Radiohead Public Library: archive of band's work goes live Radiohead have launched a new online archive of their work, called Radiohead Public Library, as well as releasing previously unavailable rarities to s …
Beethoven: the 1808 concert review – a remarkable evening, then, and now Beethoven’s 1808 benefit concert was one of classical music’s most remarkable evenings: it featured four premieres, including the 5th and 6th symphoni …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Lucky Alex42 has just discovered PG Wodehouse and …
CBSO/Gražinytė-Tyla review – massed forces rise to a monumental Mahler Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla is taking it steadily, but she is already almost halfway through a Mahler cycle with the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra. U …
Lee Child letting go of his creation is a tale told by other bestsellers “Not much surprises me these days but this news did,” said Ian Rankin of Lee Child’s revelation this weekend that his brother, Andrew Grant, would be …
Jimmy Heath obituary Summary: The saxophonist Jimmy Heath, who has died aged 93, flew the flag for bebop – that hyperactive, melodically cryptic, highwire-act of a jazz idiom – wit …
Royal wedding cellist calls for action on diversity in music Sheku Kanneh-Mason, the award-winning cellist who rose to prominence after performing at Harry and Meghan’s wedding, has called for greater investment …
Dear Life by Rachel Clarke review – somewhere towards the end Dying is what we do. Rich and poor, quickly or slowly, in pain or in peace, young and old and somewhere in between, we all come to our own sure extinc …
Poetry book of the month: Arias by Sharon Olds – review Summary: The American Sharon Olds goes where many poets would fear to tread and others not dream of treading. Like a curious child, she wanders past No Entry s …
Dedicated followers: collectors of book inscriptions share their notes Summary: The book tells you a story before you’ve read a word of it. On the cover is Charlie Brown, carrying a baseball bat and dejectedly dragging his mitt, a …
My greatest honor: I wrote a book that touched people living in poverty Three weeks after my first book was published, I sat on a ragged couch in a greenroom at a studio in San Francisco, working furiously on two cough dro …
Half of a Yellow Sun ends abruptly - but at the right time Summary: It’s a historical fact that the Biafran war lasted from 1967 until 1970. But like all apparently objective historical facts, this one feels more subje …
Anthony Braxton Standard Quartet review – melodies twisted into unfamiliar territory The standard is a quintessential concept in jazz. A canonical composition reinterpreted and disassembled by both new players and established elders, t …
Ballet Shoes gets 21st-century update from Carrie Hope Fletcher Summary: Ballet Shoes, Noel Streatfeild’s classic tale of three adopted girls hoping for – or dreading – a life on the stage, is to be reimagined for the moder …
Ozzy Osbourne reveals Parkinson's diagnosis Summary: Ozzy Osbourne has revealed he has been diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease after a year of health problems. During an interview with Good Morning Ameri …
American Dirt: why critics are calling Oprah's book club pick exploitative and divisive American Dirt, the third novel by Jeanine Cummins, begins with a group of assassins opening fire on a quinceañera cookout. We watch Lydia’s entire fam …
The Volunteer by Jack Fairweather review – the hero who infiltrated Auschwitz Just after Witold Pilecki’s arrival at Auschwitz concentration camp in September 1940, Deputy Commandant SS-Hauptsturmführer Karl Fritzsch addressed t …
Agency by William Gibson review – a world in an instant William Gibson has never believed that science fiction predicts the future: it only ever talks about the present. His most recent novel, 2014’s The Pe …
Highfire by Eoin Colfer review – a joyous fantasy for grownups Irish author Eoin Colfer mined the tropes of contemporary fantasy in his bestselling Artemis Fowl children’s books about a tweenage criminal mastermin …
Suspended Grammys chief Deborah Dugan alleges sexual misconduct in Recording Academy Deborah Dugan, the chief executive and president of the Recording Academy, which organises the Grammy awards, who was suspended last week after a misc …
I am the 'book murderer', but I tear them apart out of love We should never bisect the things we love. Friends, nations, puppies. I would argue an exception for pizza. But over the last 24 hours I have found th …
Cairo international book fair turns away jailed publisher's company Cairo international book fair has excluded imprisoned publisher Khaled Lotfy’s firm from the event citing “security reasons”, the International Publis …
The month's best mixes: mutating moods and club-ready wreckers DJ Taj Jersey Club Winter Mix 2020 TikTok’s meme-driven transformation of Old Town Road into a global blockbuster hit was cultural amplification on an …
Juice WRLD's death ruled accidental oxycodone and codeine overdose The rapper Juice WRLD’s official cause of death has been ruled an accidental overdose. The Cook county medical examiner’s office cited toxic levels of …
Can We Be Happier? by Richard Layard review – a breathless tribute to the “science of happiness” Summary: Almost any product can be branded, in the wearisome idiom of advertising, a “revolution”. So it is with the happiness industry which, in Richard Layar …
Low by Jeet Thayil review – a lost weekend in Mumbai The Indian novelist, poet and musician Jeet Thayil has much in common with the addled protagonist of his new novel, Dominic Ullis. Both write books, h …
Is the word 'polygraph' hiding a bare-faced lie? This week the government announced that it would subject persons convicted of terrorism offences to lie-detector tests before early release. Such test …
Louise Alder & Joseph Middleton: Lines Written During a Sleepless Night review – worth staying up for Here’s a really lovely disc from two of classical song’s brightest artists. The soprano Louise Alder and pianist Joseph Middleton start with Rachmanin …
Charles Sprawson obituary Iris Murdoch called Haunts of the Black Masseur: The Swimmer As Hero, Charles Sprawson’s classic memoir, “as zestful as a plunge in champagne”. The bo …
Sinfonietta/Fischer review – mystery and awe, from Debussy to Harvey The London Sinfonietta’s Sound Across a Century is a two-part set of lecture-concerts, presented by the musicologist Jonathan Cross, exploring the mod …
J Hus – Big Conspiracy review: British rap star lights up his own lane Earlier this week, it became apparent that J Hus’s new album, the follow-up to 2017’s Brit and Mercury-nominated Common Sense, had leaked. It was a th …
Still a boys' club: don't fall for the hype that the music industry has changed The 2020 Grammys almost made it over the finish line without controversy. The nominees for this Sunday’s ceremony boasted unprecedented gender equalit …
Pet Shop Boys: 'The acoustic guitar should be banned' The new Pet Shop Boys album is, they say, the third in a trilogy. Hotspot follows 2013’s Electric and 2016’s Super, all collaborations with producer S …
Arandel: InBach review – Bach through 100 electronic kaleidoscopes Summary: More than the work of any other composer, Johann Sebastian Bach’s music seems to be genre-neutral. Over the past three centuries these pure, uninflect …
Twin Atlantic: Power review – Soaring Scot-rockers' smooth synth detour As the charts bristle with elliptical trap chants and the patchwork motifs of too-cool-for-choruses pop, your best bet for big, euphoric melodies now …
Correspondents by Tim Murphy review – from the Middle East to the US, and back Summary: As a new decade opens with the world awaiting the consequences of a US military strike in Baghdad, the UK publication of Tim Murphy’s novel could hard …
Wire: Mind Hive review – sinewy, stripped-back, fearful – and beautiful The career of Wire, frontman Colin Newman once proudly announced, is “a one-way trip”. It’s not an idle boast. On stage today, you might get one song …
Okay Kaya: Watch This Liquid Pour Itself review – strange dream-pop tales of thwarted lust On this beguiling second album by New York singer Kaya Wilkins, it’s as if heartbreak has been translated into her native Norwegian and back again via …
Wild Game by Adrienne Brodeur review – the reader wants to scream There are stories about good mothers and bad mothers, attentive and neglectful mothers: and then there’s Adrienne Brodeur’s mother, Malabar, who deser …
Nicolas Godin: Concrete and Glass review – a pretty facade on shaky foundations It’s hard to credit now how revolutionary Air’s first album, Moon Safari, sounded in 1998 – a soufflé of a record so light and fluffy it was irresisti …
Story of woman who heads south takes prize for 'evoking spirit of the north' Jessica Andrews has won the £10,000 Portico prize, which goes to the book deemed to “best evoke the spirit of the north”, for her story of a girl from …
From Skepta’s dystopia to Travis Scott’s fairground: are immersive shows the future of live music? Live shows, we are often told, are where like-minded people join together in a shared euphoria. In reality, however, you are either pressed up against …
Sydney bookstore says it was targeted by pickup artists from 'dating coaching' company A commercial “dating coaching” company has been using a popular Sydney bookstore for its clients to test out predatory “pickup” techniques. In an open …
La Roux: 'My label dropped me on New Year's Day. I was like, yippee!' This is part of my stage set from Glastonbury 2010,” says Elly Jackson, AKA La Roux, pointing at an 8ft gold- and silver-plated palm tree. “I got ligh …
The Imposteress Rabbit Breeder by Karen Harvey review – a simple case? In October 1726 an extraordinary story emerged from the market town of Godalming in Surrey that captivated the nation. According to reports, confirmed …
The week in classical: Street Scene; SCO/ Emelyanychev – review Sweltering heat, a crowded Manhattan tenement of people failing to mind each other’s business, Kurt Weill’s Street Scene (1946) bristles with disconte …
One to watch: Obongjayar Much of London’s recent music output is indebted to west Africa. Whether it’s the way that contemporary Nigerian pop genre Afrobeats has melded with r …
Black Country, New Road review – truly a sound less travelled There are, apparently, seven people on stage, making what sounds like eastern Mediterranean rave music. The lighting (of which there is little) and th …
Happy ever after: why writers are falling out of love with marriage Greta Gerwig’s film adaptation of Louisa May Alcott’s 1868 classic Little Women begins with an adult Jo March entering the smoke-filled, man-filled of …
Book clinic: what postmodernist writers should I try? Q: I love Ben Lerner. Can you please recommend some other good postmodernist writers? Keana Sierra, 23, Luthier, Norway A: Alex Preston, an author, jo …
Home listening: August Stradal, the Kitgut Quartet and Kenneth Hamilton • For me, and it seems for many others (more than 7m hits on Spotify and counting), a standout classical music track of recent times is Víkingur Ólafs …
Pet Shop Boys: Hotspot review – evergreen dancefloor nous Neil Tennant has never been one to shy away from the issues, but during his 35 years as a cerebral pop operator, he has usually held them at arm’s len …
The Teskey Brothers review – Aussie blues revivalists let the good times roll It feels preposterous to suggest a band who formed in 2008 are enjoying a meteoric rise, but in the case of the Teskey Brothers, it makes a weird kind …
Angela Hewitt review – brain-teasing Bach and Beethoven's bite Beethoven’s admiration for Bach knew no bounds. So in this year marking the 250th anniversary of his birth, Beethoven would doubtless have felt flatte …
Theft by Luke Brown review – angst in the age of Brexit Luke Brown is magnetised by the nature of honesty, deception and departures. His first novel, My Biggest Lie, followed the fortunes of a man whose pro …
Halsey: Manic review –  sounds a bit like everything you know, but better If Billie Eilish is the US pop star already defining the 2020s with her low-key rasp, then 25-year-old Halsey feels like the Pink to her Robyn. Both h …
Schoolboy Q review – South Central energy with a nod to Kendrick If there’s a name that Quincy Hanley, AKA Schoolboy Q, could justifiably feel tired of hearing in connection with his own then it’s that of Kendrick L …
In Brief: Providence Lost; The Year Without Summer; Reasons to Be Cheerful – reviews Providence Lost Paul Lay Head of Zeus, £30, pp326 At a time when contemporary history often prizes showmanship at the expense of authority, it is salu …
Poliça: When We Stay Alive review – airs of elegant detachment Minneapolis’s Poliça set out their stall on their excellent 2012 debut, Give You the Ghost. With Ryan Olson’s ahead-of-its-time blend of indie, alt-R& …
Letter: Herbert Chappell obituary I knew Herbert Chappell from when he was working on his doctorate at Oxford. Having graduated in English, I embarked, without formal qualifications an …
Grammy awards 2020: full list of winners Record of the year Bon Iver – Hey, Ma Billie Eilish – Bad Guy – WINNER Ariana Grande – 7 Rings H.E.R. – Hard Place Khalid – Talk Lil Nas X featuring B …
Grammy awards 2020: Billie Eilish wins big, Kobe Bryant tributes pour in Summary: Billie Eilish reigned supreme at the Grammys on Sunday night, winning five awards including best new artist, album of the year and song of the year fo …
Orwell: A Man of Our Time by Richard Bradford review – undone by its own premise Two years ago, a former employee of a Russian misinformation factory reached for a literary classic in order to describe his dirty work. No prizes for …
Red at the Bone by Jacqueline Woodson review – poetic and profound Teen pregnancy is a staple of young adult fiction, but Jacqueline Woodson, the author of a number of groundbreaking books for that age group, has embe …
Poem of the week: Sycamore Gap by Zoe Mitchell Summary: Sycamore Gap You’re history, said the tree to the wall; the last crumbling remains of empire. You are the invader, replied the wall. I am the conquero …
Cremate me to the sound of Disco Inferno! What song do you want to die to? We frame our lives with music, celebrating birthdays and anniversaries to curated playlists, labouring over tracks to give birth to. But when we’re dy …
Grammys 2020: Billie Eilish's triumph overshadowed but well-deserved Almost all awards ceremonies tend to come with a side order of controversy, but whatever took place at this year’s Grammys was clearly going to be ove …
Clara Schumann songs review - giving voice to unfamiliar and fascinating music Unlike Alma Schindler, who was forced to give up all her ambitions to compose when she married Gustav Mahler, Robert Schumann positively encouraged hi …
Xylouris White review – fearless and joyous Greek folk music A former garage on an industrial estate in Salford may seem an unusual place to find traditional Greek folk music on a Sunday evening. Nevertheless, t …
Celtic Connections to scale back on overseas acts to fight climate crisis A Scottish festival celebrating international folk, roots and traditional music has said it may have to limit the number of overseas artists it invite …
Survivor: how we made Eye of the Tiger Jim Peterik, former keyboardist Survivor had released two albums, neither of which had done particularly well, and we were worried our label was going …
Small music venues to get 50% reduction in business rates The government has committed to reducing business rates for small and medium-sized music venues in England and Wales for the first time. The 50% reduc …
Catharsis queen: how Billie Eilish became the voice of Gen Z – and the Grammys Just before Billie Eilish won album of the year at the Grammys on Sunday night, she was caught on camera. “Please don’t be me, please,” she appeared t …
The familiar Sydney sound spliced into Billie Eilish's Bad Guy If you listened carefully, you might just have heard it. Sitting underneath the pulsating chorus of Billie Eilish’s Grammy award-winning smash hit, Ba …
Strange Hotel by Eimear McBride review – evasive and claustrophobic If you’ve read so much as a sentence of Eimear McBride’s writing, it is likely to have burned into your brain. Her first two novels, A Girl Is a Half- …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup Haven’t They Grown Sophie Hannah Hodder & Stoughton, £16.99, pp336 The premise of Sophie Hannah’s new thriller is entirely, darkly irresistible. It op …
Paulo Coelho deletes draft of children's book collaboration with Kobe Bryant Author Paulo Coelho has deleted the draft of a children’s book he was working on with Kobe Bryant, saying that without the basketball player’s contrib …
Mazel Tov by JS Margot review – a memoir of mutual affection Summary: Even to many Jews, the laws and mores of Orthodox Judaism can seem forbidding and inscrutable. Exactly what is it that constitutes “work” on the Sabba …
Stephen King says Oscars are 'rigged in favor of the white folks' Stephen King has rowed back on his controversial comments about diversity in the Oscars, acknowledging in a lengthy essay that the awards are still “r …
Graphic novel New Kid wins prestigious Newbery Medal For the first time, a graphic novel has won the Newbery Medal, the oldest and most prestigious children’s book award in the US. The win places cartoon …
Costa prize: Jack Fairweather wins book of the year with The Volunteer The former war reporter Jack Fairweather has won the Costa book of the year award for The Volunteer, his biography of a Polish resistance fighter who …
The Secret Guests by BW Black review – John Banville’s royal yarn Summary: In The Secret Guests, BW Black – AKA Benjamin Black, AKA Irish novelist John Banville – gussies up a wartime rumour of royal jiggery-pokery into a fan …
'No philosophy and everybody is welcome': how Closer catalysed Ukrainian electronica You get the feeling you’re in for a big night as soon as you exit the taxi outside Closer. Climbing the graffitied staircase that leads to the Kyiv cl …
From Homer to Alexievich: top 10 books about the human cost of war Growing up with the stories of the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in 1935 and Ethiopia’s eventual victory, I did not need much prodding to imagine the c …
Sturgill Simpson review – a trudge along the highways of Southern rock It’s hard not to admire Sturgill Simpson’s refusal to give two hoots about expectations. This is a man who followed his breakthrough album of psychede …
Hylda Sims obituary My friend, Hylda Sims, the skiffle singer, poet, songwriter and activist, has died aged 87, after a short illness. Hylda was a strong presence on the …
Dispatches from hell: the extraordinary story of the hero who infiltrated Auschwitz One spring day in 1948, two children were sitting at their school desks in Poland when the tannoy crackled into life to announce that their father had …
How to Argue with a Racist by Adam Rutherford review – we’re all related Summary: Every Nazi had Jewish ancestors. Discovering this fact alone is worth the price of Adam Rutherford’s engaging and enlightening new book. A geneticist …
Djinn Patrol on the Purple Line by Deepa Anappara review – a dazzling debut Deepa Anappara’s debut novel begins with nine-year-old Jai competing with his older sister in a headstand competition on the bed. From his upside-down …
Jonas Brothers review – slick, bombastic and knowingly cheesy Disney alumni often proudly distance themselves from the mouse that built them. Miley Cyrus, Demi Lovato and Selena Gomez have left behind clean-cut i …
The Quarry by Ben Halls review – on the frontline of breadline Britain Summary: “These are our lives here, happening right now,” declares the shift-worker narrator of “Ham”, the first story in Ben Halls’s debut collection. “What d …
Madonna review – London residency short on hits but big on British banter A curious mix of anticipation and trepidation hangs in the air of the London Palladium as the audience dutifully stash their mobile phones in locked p …
Return to Y'Hup: The World of Ivor Cutler review – tribute to surreal poet's fantasy island Summary: A self-described “oblique musical philosopher”, Ivor Cutler was the Glasgow-born surrealist who wielded whimsy like a dagger. He bewitched everyone fr …
Is the era of Brexit and Trump an age of ‘peace’? This week there was an unexpected outbreak of peace, at least rhetorically. Jared Kushner unveiled his “peace plan” for the Middle East, which his fat …
Nora Roberts: ‘I could fill all the bookstores in all the land’ Summary: Nora Roberts was a young stay-at-home mum with two small boys when 3ft of snow hit Maryland in February 1979, and the family was stuck inside. She pic …
Francine Toon: 'Witches are empowered women' Francine Toon spent two years of her childhood in the Scottish Highlands, near a town called Dornoch – “the last place in the UK to execute someone fo …
US publishing remains 'as white today as it was four years ago' Summary: As the controversial novel American Dirt raises questions about representation for US publishing, a survey has found that – despite efforts to diversi …
Clairières: Songs by Lili and Nadia Boulanger review  – perfect advocacy for sibling composers Last year, tenor Nicholas Phan and pianist Myra Huang built a recital disc around Fauré’s song cycle La Bonne Chanson. They have followed it with a di …
Mary Beard sits for naked portrait in new BBC programme The academic and TV presenter Mary Beard has taken a bold approach to her new two-part investigation of the history and impact of the nude in art by c …
Behind the scenes at Alice's Adventures Under Ground – a photo essay Director/designer Antony McDonald during rehearsals for the world premiere of Gerald Barry’s Alice’s Adventures Under Ground at London’s Royal Opera H …
Shenseea: 'I grew up listening to Rihanna. Now she's listening to me' Shenseea is midway through a European tour, staying in a budget hotel at the side of a dual carriageway in London. Despite her surroundings, she exude …
Orchestre National de Lille/Bloch review – masterful French music ‘J’aime la musique française” is what the Orchestre National de Lille were calling this programme, when performing at home last week. The audience on …
Beyond American Dirt: the best books to understand Latinx culture I believe the publishing industry made a profound mistake publishing Jeanine Cummins’s wannabe narco-novel American Dirt. While we wait for the indust …
Squarepusher: Be Up a Hello review – devilish, danceable return Emerging in the mid-90s as part of the generation of artists defining Warp Records’ IDM sound, Squarepusher now presides over a discography that posit …
Art Is a Tyrant by Catherine Hewitt review – the radical life of Rosa Bonheur Rosa Bonheur was a 19th-century animalier, or animal painter, who liked her subjects to make their own way to her studio. Over the long decades of her …
The Office of Gardens and Ponds by Didier Decoin review – into a vanished world Didier Decoin, who won the Prix Goncourt in 1977, spent 14 years researching and writing this novel, set over 1,000 years ago in Heian Japan. He effec …
Jeet Thayil: ‘The last book that made me laugh? A book of poems by Narendra Modi’ The book I am currently reading Edna O’Brien’s Girl, which serves as a corrective to the creative writing rule “Write what you know”. There is no risk …
Blossoms: Foolish Loving Spaces review – marvellously uncool exuberance Towards the beginning of the last decade, with indie conclusively out to pasture, a handful of male groups that might once have made mileage out of be …
'It's a war zone': why is a generation of rappers dying young? It might sound callous, but Jacob Thureson’s parents, Erik and Judy, were not too worried when they heard about his latest overdose. It had happened a …
K Michelle: All Monsters Are Human review – slick R&B with a sharp whiff of smut Like most people who have managed to extract long-term success from reality TV stardom, K Michelle is well-versed in the art of the overshare. The Ten …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Hayley Williams, Mitski, Stephen Malkmus Hayley Williams Simmer Hayley Williams was first signed as a solo artist, at age 14, to a major label who wanted her to become a mall-rock teen queen …
Susan Choi: ‘A lot of people seem to feel very seen by the book’ Susan Choi is “pretty partial” when describing Trust Exercise, which has won the National Book award for fiction and been a runaway sensation in her n …
Elon Musk's new EDM single reviewed – 'Bringing erectile dysfunction to the masses!' Like Charles Foster Kane splashing his millions on promoting his mistress’s disastrous opera career, very rich men have, in recent years, displayed a …
Radio 4's Brexit music: it feels like something for a secular funeral With rather splendid timing, on Thursday Radio 3 broadcast a live concert of the Hallé Orchestra playing Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony, at the start of M …
Bob Shane obituary In 1958 the Kingston Trio, a clean-cut American folk group, achieved chart success with the murder ballad Tom Dooley. Based on the story of Tom Dula, …
Why not let Mexican writers earn the seven-figure advances? Let’s talk about cultural appropriation. Many of you will have seen the conversations around American Dirt by Jeanine Cummins, a novel about a Mexican …
Between Two Fires by Joshua Yaffa review – how Putin rules Russia The last couple of years have produced a lot of books about Russia. Many, if not most of them, argue that Donald Trump’s election was a plot by Vladim …
The week in classical: Igor Levit; BBC SO/ Saraste; OAE/ Norrington – review Why or where a piece of music was written, to force a complex debate into a stubby observation, matters more with some composers than others. For Shos …
One to watch: Sarah Mary Chadwick Need a boost? New Zealand singer-songwriter Sarah Mary Chadwick has your back! Hark to the rambunctious country-punk of recent single Let’s Fight: “At …
Sam Lee: Old Wow review – a dazzling fusion of nature and song Ever since childhood singalongs around the fires of Forest School Camps, folksong and mother nature have been indivisible passions for Sam Lee. The si …
Naomi Ishiguro: ‘Short stories are like songs – I think of an anthology like an album’ Naomi Ishiguro worked as a bookseller in Bath before studying creative writing at the University of East Anglia. Her first collection of short stories …
Book clinic: stories to captivate reluctant boys Q: My 12-year-old son dislikes most novels, saying that he hates description. He is happy reading the Diary of a Wimpy Kid series, but they last no le …
Andy Gill, influential guitarist with Gang of Four, dies aged 64 Summary: Andy Gill, the guitarist with Gang of Four, whose sound influenced generations of post-punk bands, has died aged 64. The news was announced by the ban …
Home listening: a good week for Ariadne Summary: • Countless composers have had a fascination with the abandoned figure of Ariadne, or Arianna, who helped Theseus kill the Cretan Minotaur and ended u …
Inventory: A River, a City, a Family by Darran Anderson review – troubled lives brought to light “How might it be possible to construct a lost person?” asks Darran Anderson in the preface to Inventory, “...to rebuild a human being from photographs …
How cartoonist Isabel Greenberg brought the Brontës’ Angria to life When Isabel Greenberg’s third graphic novel begins, it is July 1849. A young woman with a pugnacious jaw and a pair of unflattering spectacles on the …
A Very Stable Genius; Free, Melania reviews – the lord of misrule and his mysterious wife To begin with, journalists exposing the mayhem of the Trump administration sounded a shrill alarm: the incendiary slogan of Michael Wolff’s book was F …
J Hus: Big Conspiracy review – reflective but still reckless Summary: J Hus’s 2016 outing Common Sense was pivotal in evolving contemporary British urban music, bringing African R&B influences into London’s admixture of …
A Long Petal of the Sea by Isabel Allende review – love on the run from Franco Towards the end of Isabel Allende’s expansive new book, its protagonist, Victor Dalmau, looks back over his 80 years. “My life has been a series of jo …
Kesha: High Road review – back in the driver’s seat Summary: When Kesha Sebert emerged in 2009 as Ke$ha she was styled as the ultimate party girl, singing EDM-tinged anthems about glugging Jack Daniels for break …
In brief: Nothing to See Here; One of Them; Big Sky – review Nothing to See Here Kevin Wilson Text, £10.99, pp288 Lillian is 28 and in a dead-end job. Years ago, she was a scholarship student at an elite boardin …
Curiouser and curiouser: Thomas Adès on Gerald Barry's Wonderland Gerald Barry’s music inhabits the same kind of space that Lewis Carroll’s Alice books do. Carroll might not have put it like this (he was writing pre- …
Andy Gill: Gang of Four's genius guitarist who burned a route out of punk Britain’s late 70s provincial punk scenes were seldom places for the faint-hearted, but few were as starkly polarised as that in Leeds. At one extreme …
Siegfried review – Jurowski showcases Wagner with wonder and excitement The London Philharmonic’s Ring with Vladimir Jurowski goes, it would seem, from strength to strength. Presenting one opera a year, they have now reach …
Andy Gill obituary Summary: The post-punk period of the late 1970s and early 80s bred a number of innovative and challenging bands, of whom Gang of Four proved to be one of the m …
Shakira and J-Lo's Super Bowl show: an electric burst of energy Summary: Jennifer Lopez and Shakira did what they had to do at the Super Bowl half-time show this year at Hard Rock Stadium in Miami, Florida. It’s not an envi …
Long Bright River by Liz Moore review – startlingly fresh In 2009, Liz Moore accompanied photographer Jeffrey Stockbridge to the Philadephia neighbourhood of Kensington, where he was documenting the human cos …
A Small Revolution in Germany by Philip Hensher – review Summary: It’s sometimes hard not to picture Philip Hensher’s non-writing hand stroking a cat as he comes up with sly ways to throw shade. Here’s Spike, the nar …
Poem of the week: In the Rose Garden by Helen Tookey In the Rose Garden She’s in the rose garden again, staring at her right arm, its pale soft underside that never gets the sun, never gets tanned. It’s …
50 great tracks for February from David Bowie, Waxahatchee, J Hus and more Waxahatchee – Fire Katie Crutchfield got sober before making her fifth album as Waxahatchee. The resulting clarity shines through Fire, the first song …
Mabel review – a blast of charisma from the warrior queen February is shaping up to be a hectic month for Mabel McVey. After finishing the sold-out UK leg of her current tour, she will perform at the Brit awa …
Carmen review – revival's real stars are Peleggi and the ENO orchestra Summary: It’s the world’s most performed French opera, but the success of Bizet’s Carmen has always rested on its parade of predictable Spanish icons: Gypsies, …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. First, let’s hear it for union. BrendaTwisse has j …
How we made Free, by Ultra Naté Summary: Ultra Naté, singer, songwriter I fell into club culture in my first year at university in Baltimore. During the week, I’d be in classes, studying medi …
Year of the Rabbit by Tian Veasna review – art that speaks volumes I feel more and more that comics are capable of dealing even with the most difficult of subjects – an ability that has to do, I think, with their rela …
Taking Maigret's first case in for questioning Pietr the Latvian wasn’t the first book that Georges Simenon wrote. He’d managed more than 100 pulp fiction novels before this one under a number of p …
Hillary without Bill: Curtis Sittenfeld rewrites Clinton's personal history Hillary Rodham Clinton recounts, in her memoir Living History, how Bill Clinton “asked me to marry him again, and again, and I always said no”. Until, …
'No Divine Revelation, Feminine Intuition or Mumbo Jumbo': Dorothy L Sayers and the Detection Club In 1933, Lucy Malleson – who published detective stories under the name Anthony Gilbert – received a letter from one of her literary heroes. Dorothy L …
London Sinfonietta review – the haunting charm of Mauricio Kagel It is 11 years since Mauricio Kagel died, but it’s still hard to pinpoint where he fits into the busy history of music since 1945. Though he lived mos …
George Steiner, influential culture critic, dies aged 90 The eminent literary critic and essayist George Steiner, who explored the power and limitations of language and culture in a series of hugely influent …
A Bit of a Stretch by Chris Atkins review – how to survive in prison If you thought you knew how bad British prisons are, you haven’t read this book. Drugs, riots, suicides, squalor, overcrowding, understaffing, dangero …
Strange Hotel by Eimear McBride review – an immersive inner journey “Door. Scratched dull lock. Put in. Turn the key. Fail. Joggle. Lean into. Be firm. Try again now. Try again, again. And, on another try, there. She’s …
Austerity, gentrification and big tunes: why illegal raves are flourishing It’s an hour after midnight on New Year’s Day 2020, and a stream of revellers is gathering in an alleyway next to KFC on London’s Old Kent Road. They …
The Lost Pianos of Siberia by Sophy Roberts review – a journey to the ‘End of Everything’ In the summer of 2015, travel journalist Sophy Roberts found herself in a tent in Mongolia deep in conversation with a talented young local pianist wh …
Patti Smith pitches in to help burgled Oregon bookshop The poet and punk-rock star Patti Smith has added another string to her bow: bookshop defender. After reading about a break-in at an independent books …
Why was Katy Perry chosen to be an ambassador for the British Asian Trust? Name: Katy Perry. Age: 35. Occupation: New ambassador of the British Asian Trust. Oh great, good for her. No, not, “Oh great, good for her”. Let me as …
The Chats, Montaigne, Missy Higgins and more: Australia's best new music for February Missy Higgins – Carry You For fans of: Holly Throsby, James Taylor, the Whitlams The final episode of Tim Minchin’s stunning new series, Upright, clos …
Slade drummer Don Powell 'fired by email' after 57-year partnership One of British pop’s most enduring partnerships has come to an end, not with a bang, but by email. Don Powell, the drummer with glam rock band Slade, …
Edward Kamau Brathwaite obituary Edward Brathwaite, also known as Kamau Brathwaite, who has died aged 89, was a Caribbean poet and historian, praised by the American poet Adrienne Ric …
'Fake diversity': Barnes & Noble cancels race-swapped classic covers Barnes & Noble, America’s largest bookseller, has withdrawn a new series of “diverse” classic book covers following a backlash from writers who say it …
'Love, loss and longing': the best books on migration, chosen by writers Summary: Not all writers think of migrants as a “faceless brown mass”. Indeed, if there is one thing that readers should take away from the ill-fated release o …
Caucus: from Iowa shambles to backroom fixes This week, Democrat members in Iowa met to choose their presidential nominee, but the headlines the next day were all about the “Iowa caucus shambles” …
Frazey Ford: U Kin B the Sun review – bright shoots from knotted roots of American song Summary: The lead single from Frazey Ford’s 2015 album Indian Ocean, a coruscating breakup lament called Done, came accompanied by one of the great videos of t …
Picture books on prescription In Jayde Perkin’s exquisitely moving Mum’s Jumper, a little girl leaves her mother behind in hospital when visiting hours are over. The next day, the …
La Roux review – synth star throws a joyously sleazy blowout Summary: Whether it’s the spikier 80s synths of her 2009 breakthrough hits or the breezy disco stylings of her wonderful second album, 2014’s Trouble in Paradi …
How locked-room mystery king Seishi Yokomizo broke into English at last A Japanese village in 1937 is shocked by a gruesome murder – a newlywed couple found shut away in a room “soaked in the crimson of their own blood”, a …
Green Day: 'Rock'n'roll helps you dance through the apocalypse' Green Day are in their modest rehearsal space in their hometown of Oakland, California, a little haven in a country on the turn. The trio of 47-year-o …
Poet laureate Simon Armitage launches 'ambient post-rock' band Most modern poets laureate have released recordings of their work, but none hitherto has put out an album billed as providing “ambient post-rock passa …
Grown Ups by Marian Keyes review – comic, convincing and true Summary: Grown Ups starts at the end. A large and happy family is gathered at a birthday party: brothers Johnny, Ed and Liam, their wives Jessie, Cara and Nell …
Issie Barratt's Interchange: Donna's Secret review – big-band visions Back in the day, some fans would raise eyebrows at the implications of the term “jazz education” – preferring the romance that this impulsive music wa …
La Roux: Supervision review – obliquely beautiful, contrarian electro visionary When La Roux came to prominence in the late-00s with two shrill synthpop smashes – Bulletproof and In for the Kill – the duo were frequently discussed …
Inventory by Darran Anderson review – a childhood in Derry Belfast and Derry, Northern Ireland’s largest cities, are separated by the Glenshane Pass, a mountain road devoid of human habitation other than the s …
Beatrice Dillon: Workaround review – a global future-folk manifesto At the end of last year, the Guardian declared Beatrice Dillon “the most thrilling new voice in British electronic music”, and her first full-fledged …
Jojo Moyes: ‘I frequently don’t finish books. I feel it’s mean to name them, though’ Summary: The book I’m currently reading Polly Samson’s A Theatre for Dreamers. It’s a coming of age story set among a group of artists and poets, including Leo …
Makaya McCraven and Gil Scott-Heron: We're New Here review – a modern classic revived For Makaya McCraven, sampling is a means of remembrance. The Chicago-based drummer and producer has spent recent years honing his studio style to inco …
HMLTD: West of Eden review – riotous rock and grand guignol glam It seemed as though HMLTD’s moment had come and gone. A couple of years ago, their riotous gigs were the most fun you could have while paying too much …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Låpsley, Gorillaz, Elon Musk Summary: Låpsley Womxn Four years ago, the then-19-year-old emo-synth singer Holly Lapsley released a debut album that was a) Really quite incredible (yay!), a …
Charles Dickens 'treasure trove' goes to London museum Charles Dickens was precise with instructions for his dinner party: no champagne and as little wine as possible for guests before the food and definit …
Liam Gallagher's son and Ringo Starr's grandson in court over Tesco affray charge The son of Liam Gallagher and the grandson of Ringo Starr have appeared in court to deny criminal charges over an alleged late-night altercation with …
The best recent science fiction and fantasy – review roundup Anne Charnock won the 2018 Arthur C Clarke award for Dreams Before the Start of Time, exploring the future of reproductive technology; her fourth nove …
Ryan Beatty was set to be the next Bieber – then he realised he was living a lie Summary: Ryan Beatty was flying home to LA after a gig when he had an epiphany. “I remember we were about to take off and I just told my manager: ‘I can’t do t …
Judge rules Kesha defamed Dr Luke by claiming he raped Katy Perry A New York supreme court judge has ruled that Kesha defamed her former producer and label head Dr Luke – whose real name is Lukasz Gottwald – when she …
Publishing has to keep up with the world, not the other way round The results of a survey of diversity in the world of US publishing were released last month. The figures cover executives, editorial staff, sales, pub …
The Hungry and the Fat by Timur Vermes review – broad satire of migration and hypocrisy It’s the near future, and Europe has closed its borders firmly to refugees. A vast permanent camp has grown in sub-Saharan Africa, sustained (just) by …
To the Lake by Kapka Kassabova review – a dive into dark Balkan waters Summary: A travel writer’s journey is often centrifugal in its bearing, from the known to the unknown; but the journey itself has the effect of inaugurating a …
Jenny Offill: ‘I no longer felt like it wasn’t my fight’ It’s early January and freezing cold in New York when I meet Jenny Offill to talk about her new novel, Weather – an innocuous title for something that …
One to watch: Pongo Summary: After a few years when pop was all about emotional bloodletting, now stars are refusing to be defined by trauma – see recent records by Kesha and Sele …
Anna Meredith review – a careering getaway ride from musical convention In 2016, shortly after the release of her celebrated debut, Varmints, Anna Meredith revealed her top tip for composers. “Learn to play Happy Birthday. …
Peter Carey on True History of the Kelly Gang: ‘At 56, I wrote what my younger self could not have managed’ In 1961 I failed my first-year science exams at Monash University in Melbourne. In the aftermath I got a job in advertising and read Joyce’s Ulysses. …
Take one: lost Dave Brubeck tapes reveal jazz hit originally sounded like ‘a bad student band’ It is the best-selling jazz single of all time. But previously unheard rehearsal tapes reveal that Dave Brubeck’s Take Five might never have been such …
Karen Sharp Trio: Another Place review – three is the magic number Britain’s professional jazz musicians, even those such as saxophonist-composer Karen Sharp who are voted top in magazine polls, don’t spend all their …
Petina Gappah: ‘I learned Swahili to write this’ Summary: Petina Gappah was born in Zambia in 1971 and has law degrees from Cambridge, Graz University and Zimbabwe University. Her debut story collection, An E …
Book clinic: what can I read after work instead of watching TV? Q: I want to come home from work and read instead of putting on the TV. Which books will help me disconnect from my stressful office life? Uma, 40, bu …
Home listening: step up, Franz Clement and Henry Litolff • We’re going to hear a great deal of Beethoven this year, the 250th anniversary of his birth, but what of the music that shaped and influenced him, s …
Parisian Lives: Samuel Beckett, Simone de Beauvoir and Me review – a biographer’s voyage Summary: In 1971, Deirdre Bair achieved one of the great literary scoops of our times. Armed with a recently completed PhD and an abandoned career as a journal …
Lil Wayne: Funeral review – fearsome and full of life So much of what is now standard in hip-hop can be traced back to the intervention of New Orleans rapper and label boss Lil Wayne: trap eccentricity an …
Djinn Patrol on the Purple Line by Deepa Anappara – review Nine-year-old Jai lives in a slum on the outskirts of an unnamed Indian city with his parents and older sister. In many ways he is an unremarkable boy …
Psappha review – Schoenberg's Pierrot Lunaire is truly groundbreaking Schoenberg’s Pierrot Lunaire belongs alongside Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring and a few other modernist masterpieces as one of the truly groundbreaking s …
Green Day: Father of All Motherfuckers review – apolitical angst with aplomb Given that George W Bush’s presidency so enraged Green Day they recorded 2004’s American Idiot in reaction, one could be forgiven for thinking that Fa …
Hitting a Straight Lick With a Crooked Stick by Zora Neale Hurston review – wickedly funny This collection of novelist and anthropologist Zora Neale Hurston’s short stories – among them eight “lost” Harlem Renaissance tales from the 1920s an …
In brief: House of Trelawney; Black Leopard, Red Wolf; How to Argue With a Racist – reviews House of Trelawney Hannah Rothschild Bloomsbury, £16.99, pp368 Like Rothschild’s debut novel, The Improbability of Love, House of Trelawney wraps up a …
Shopping: All Or Nothing review – more frenetic and kinetic than ever Invigorating vim is the calling card of British post-punk trio Shopping, whose sound across any of their three albums to date would slot neatly into a …
Drive-By Truckers: 'We have redneck in us. No one tells us what to do' Summary: Mike Cooley has a gift for aphorism. “Paranoia’s like pulled pork,” he says, in his deep Alabama baritone. “It’s on menus all over the world, but in t …
How Anonymous became a star in publishing “For most of history, Anonymous was a woman,” wrote Virginia Woolf. Today, Anonymous is probably an outraged employee in a public service: a member of …
'Time to shine': Janelle Monáe celebrates diversity in Oscars opening number Janelle Monáe opened the Oscars in hectic style with a performance of her 2009 song Come Alive – reworked with Oscar-appropriate lyrics. Beginning in …
How Agatha Christie mystery The Pale Horse may have inspired a murderer Summary: This year’s big Agatha Christie adaptation, The Pale Horse, is one of her less well-known murder mysteries – but in some ways it has had a much greate …
Weather by Jenny Offill review – a storm gathers in Trump’s America Emotional truth is the currency of fiction. Jenny Offill’s last novel, Dept of Speculation, was a wry, caustic, funny book about motherhood and marria …
The State of Secrecy by Richard Norton-Taylor review – spooks in the spotlight It was the 1960s and Richard Norton-Taylor had just finished Oxford with a third-class degree in history. “What would you like to do?” his tutor asked …
Les Vêpres Siciliennes review – theatricality and spectacle in Verdi's grand opera Giuseppe Verdi’s determination to conquer Paris with a grand opera that fulfilled the requisites of French convention just about paid off: its first p …
Grace Jones' Meltdown: Solange, Skunk Anansie and Lee Fields to play Grace Jones has announced the first wave of performers for her edition of the annual Meltdown festival, threading her lineage as a radical black woman …
Bob Marley at 75: how a ghetto reggae star rebranded Jamaica Summary: At 7am on 6 February, on what would have been Bob Marley’s 75th birthday, the abeng conch shell blows at his old home at uptown Kingston’s 56 Hope Roa …
Whitechapel mural will celebrate the lives of Jack the Ripper's victims The social historian Hallie Rubenhold is planning to commemorate the lives of the women murdered by Jack the Ripper with a new mural in Whitechapel, w …
Sigala review – one-man party-starter defies Storm Ciara with tropical show While heavy weather battered much of the UK, the conditions in Glasgow’s Barrowland Ballroom were defiantly tropical. Dance producer Bruce Fielder, AK …
OAE/Fischer review – a new shape for late Mozart Mozart wrote his last three symphonies during a few weeks, in a flurry of inspiration so concentrated that one might usefully think of them as a singl …
Virtuoso mourns beloved £150,000 piano smashed by movers A unique piano which was treasured by the Canadian virtuoso Angela Hewitt as her “best friend” was broken beyond repair when it was dropped by special …
The Bilingual Brain by Albert Costa review – enlightening and astonishing Over the past century, perceptions of bilingualism have swung from one extreme to the other. For much of the immediate postwar years, it was thought t …
LPO/Jurowski review – ingeniously celebrating Beethoven the revolutionary All music was once new music, as the London Philharmonic’s 2020 Vision series quietly reminds us. Ingeniously programmed, and running throughout the y …
Rage Against the Machine and Stormzy to headline Reading and Leeds festival Summary: Rage Against the Machine, Stormzy and Liam Gallagher have been announced as the headliners for 2020’s Reading and Leeds festival. Rage Against the Mac …
'Bless the chaos': La Movida Madrileña, Spain's seedy, wild post-Franco underground General Franco had been dead for a while before those he repressed in Spain felt brave enough to celebrate in public. The dictator’s four-decade rule …
Marc Almond review – death and flutes in non-stop erotic cabaret ‘There’s never enough budget with these one-off things, so you just have to do what you can,” Marc Almond said ruefully during an interview with 6Musi …
Inversia: the Arctic music festival lighting up perpetual night Summary: In the Arctic Circle during the dim days of February, reality becomes a little attenuated. At 10am, it’s still dark, the streetlights colouring the pa …
Friday singer Rebecca Black gets candid about teenage struggle: 'I was afraid of the world' The singer Rebecca Black has opened up about her struggle with depression following the release of her viral hit Friday nine years ago. In an emotiona …
Gathering Evidence by Martin MacInnes review – an unnerving vision Summary: Martin MacInnes’s disquieting second novel opens with what amounts to an essay about a new social media app. Nest is the ultimate self-monitoring tool …
Martin Amis to publish novel inspired by death of Christopher Hitchens Martin Amis has written his “most intimate and epic work”, an autobiographical novel that will draw on the death of his closest friend, the polemical …
The 1975 commit to playing only gender-balanced music festivals Matt Healy, frontman of Brit award-winning band the 1975, has said the group will only perform at festivals with a gender-balanced lineup. Healy was r …
Blossoms review – chart-topping anti-lads get louche and loved up Stockport quintet Blossoms are quite the pop chameleons. They emerged in 2014 as a bob-cut, black-clad indie-psychedelic band, but by 2018 and their s …
Top 10 books of eco-fiction As our real-world ecosystem further devolves, we’ll soon move into the pining-for-our-ex-phase of the relationship – watching the BBC’s Planet Earth d …
Musical notes: Scorsese, Madonna, and the awfulness of millennium pop Summary: Inside a subversive history of music Alexis Petridis, chief rock and pop critic It was pure coincidence that I found myself reading Ted Gioia’s Music: …
Not so fast: how ‘quarantine’ turned from prayer to isolation This week the government announced that the coronavirus outbreak was “a serious and imminent threat to public health”, and gave itself new powers to f …
Iceland SO/Tortelier review – anniversary tour finds bright tones and striking textures Many orchestras have a calling card, a work from their home country that they make sure to take with them on foreign tours. For the Iceland Symphony O …
Weather by Jenny Offill review – wit for the end times In 2014, Jenny Offill’s Dept. of Speculation was greeted as a new sort of writing. Like Rachel Cusk’s Outline or Karl Ove Knausgård’s Boyhood, publish …
Slowthai in altercation at NME awards and harasses host Katherine Ryan Slowthai has been involved in an altercation at the NME awards, and has been criticised for his behaviour towards host Katherine Ryan. After being tau …
House of Trelawney by Hannah Rothschild review – comic family saga Cornwall is once again big in fiction and film. Whether your image of it is indebted to Poldark and Daphne du Maurier, or gritty nonfiction accounts o …
Meet the booksellers who are fighting back against the algorithm Heywood Hill bookshop has stood on the same street since 1936. It inhabits a Georgian townhouse at 10 Curzon Street in Mayfair, London, a blue plaque …
Dave Brubeck by Philip Clark review – a life in jazz time In 1954 the pianist Dave Brubeck became the first jazz musician of the postwar generation to be featured on the cover of Time magazine, infuriating th …
'I want to scream when I hear The Specials': readers on the songs they can't listen to any more The flatmate’s alarm … The Specials – Ghost Town Third year at university, the bloke I was flat sharing with played Ghost Town by The Specials every m …
Stormzy postpones Asian tour due to coronavirus Summary: Stormzy has postponed the Asian leg of his Heavy Is the Head world tour due to coronavirus. The south London rap star wrote on Twitter: “I was serious …
Sibelius: Symphonies 4 & 6 review – grandeur, warmth and flashes of exuberance completes cycle Summary: It has taken Mark Elder and the Hallé more than a decade to complete their survey of the Sibelius symphonies. In bringing together the two most enigma …
‘Real censorship’: Roxane Gay responds to American Dirt death threat row As writers and critics reveal the death threats they’ve received in the wake of the uproar surrounding Jeanine Cummins’ novel, American Dirt, Roxane G …
'Enough heroin to kill the whole street': does Anna Kavan's life overshadow her fiction? Anna Kavan’s 1943 essay about her time living in New Zealand begins with unusual reluctance: “I have not got any useful information about New Zealand, …
‘It’s probably fear’: why Eddy Current Suppression Ring ran away from fame Last December, Eddy Current Suppression Ring, the beloved garage-rock four-piece from Melbourne, released their first album in a decade. It was knowin …
Billie Eilish: No Time to Die review – a Bond theme befitting the Craig era James Bond was a bit of a mouldy fig when it came to music. There weren’t many things worse, he opined in Goldfinger, than “listening to the Beatles w …
Justin Bieber: Changes review – the sound of fame being shunned Connoisseurs of documentaries that reveal the full horror of becoming famous – particularly at a young age – are currently spoilt for choice. Over on …
British Book awards balance art and selling power to decide best writer in 30 years It could be almost the setup for a joke, but a former president, a Booker winner and an erotic fiction superstar have walked on to the British Book aw …
Pone: the paralysed producer making music with his eyes Summary: Interviewing an artist who can’t speak is an unusual, almost meditative experience. I am in a small town outside Toulouse in south-western France to m …
Amour by Stefania Rousselle review – how the French talk about love Summary: On the night of 13 November 2015, Stefania Rousselle was on the sofa watching TV when an alert popped up on her phone: “Hostages taken at the Bataclan …
DJ Diaki: Balani Fou review – landslide of rhythms brings Africa to the dancefloor Recent years have seen some of the most exciting dancefloor-focused music moving further and further away from its spiritual homes of Detroit, Chicago …
Strange Antics by Clement Knox review – a history of seduction Are we living in an age of sexual liberation or sexual crisis? In contemporary western societies, it is often hard to tell. Sex, seemingly, is everywh …
Tame Impala: The Slow Rush review – a stunning explosion of heartfelt pop Tame Impala, AKA 34-year-old Australian Kevin Parker, started out in 2010 as a home-recording, guitar-wielding psychedelic rocker, but 2015’s Currents …
Katie Gately: Loom review – nightmarish orchestrated despair Summary: A nail-bomb of grief explodes in this second album by US musician Katie Gately, trauma seeming to rip open its edges. It was written while her mother …
Nathaniel Rateliff: And It's Still Alright review – a mixed bag of Americana Nathaniel Rateliff had been around the houses before people started taking notice: an album apiece with Lost in the Flood and his own group, the Wheel …
Moses Boyd: Dark Matter review – dancefloor-friendly kaleidoscopic jazz from UK drummer Summary: Drummer Moses Boyd has always been a difficult musician to pin down. Half of the fiercely propulsive free jazz duo Binker and Moses, he was heralded a …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Sam Smith, Pussycat Dolls, EOB Sam Smith To Die For Previously, you could tell how sad a new Sam Smith song was going to be by the accompanying coat. Black blazer? Mid-paced tear-je …
The best recent crime and thrillers Like Lucy Foley’s bestselling first foray into the crime genre The Hunting Party, The Guest List (HarperCollins, £12.99) is a very enjoyable updating …
Julia Ebner:  ‘There's an adrenaline rush in undercover work, getting inside a far-right movement’ One October evening in 2017, the counter-extremism expert Julia Ebner put on a wig and a pair of glasses, walked into a pub in Mayfair, London, and sa …
Joseph Shabalala obituary Joseph Shabalala, who has died aged 78, was the founder, leader and musical director of Ladysmith Black Mambazo, the most popular vocal group Africa h …
Move over, Rosalía – fado is the new flamenco Summary: For a few glorious moments at the end of January, downtown Los Angeles was enveloped by a whirlwind of Iberian fervour, as Catalan singer Rosalía brou …
Barnes & Noble was right to cancel its ‘diversity’ initiative I never cared much for the classics. Pride and Prejudice was cool because I’m here for strong female leads, but I preferred Pride and Prejudice and Zo …
Red at the Bone by Jacqueline Woodson review – heartbreak and joy Summary: In US author Jacqueline Woodson’s haunting novel, a 16-year-old girl’s coming-of-age party prompts an avalanche of memories for her middle-class Afric …
Fighting the tyranny of ‘niceness’: why we need difficult women Difficult. It’s a word that rests on a knife-edge: when applied to a woman, it can be admiring, fearful, insulting and dismissive, all at once. In 201 …
The Bilingual Brain by Albert Costa review – the science of learning A third of the way through this absorbing and engagingly written book, Albert Costa describes a family meal: “The father speaks Spanish with his wife …
‘I appreciate humanity now’: King Krule on punk, parenthood and finding peace Some time towards the end of 2019, Archy Marshall, AKA King Krule, found himself in Warrington standing on a wide stretch of ankle-high grass. Behind …
Jessie Ware: ‘Music was my bread and butter. Now it isn’t, which is more enjoyable' You can tell a true-born foodie by their urgency around a menu, and when the musician Jessie Ware meets me for lunch it is at a Middle Eastern restaur …
Adults by Emma Jane Unsworth review – life in the Instagram age Summary: Early on in Adults, protagonist Jenny agonises over a caption for an Instagram post of a croissant. She auditions various phrases and hashtags, messag …
The week in classical: Les vêpres siciliennes; Luisa Miller review – a passion for patriarchy Fathers and sons, fathers and daughters. When Verdi gets a thing about dads you know it will not end well. New productions of Verdi’s lesser-known wor …
Tame Impala: The Slow Rush review – polished disco funk Around the time of 2015’s Currents – the third Tame Impala album – mainman Kevin Parker described having an epiphany some time previously. Driving aro …
One to watch: Angelica Garcia “Enough with the Cadillacs and the Hampton estates,” snarls Angelica Garcia on It Don’t Hinder Me, an arresting whirlwind of a track that sounds like …
Blond ambition: the rise and rise of Johnny Flynn, a man for all seasons Being a fictional hero was once a more straightforward business. You were handsome, you were honourable and brave: you were in. Colin Firth only had t …
Rural idyll where Ancient Mariner met Kubla Khan saved for nation The dilapidated Grade II West Country home where William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge created their joint masterpiece, Lyrical Ballads, has …
Seth Lakeman: A Pilgrim’s Tale review – all aboard the Mayflower Summary: The actual 400th anniversary of the Mayflower’s setting sail from Plymouth for America isn’t until September, but Devon-born Seth Lakeman is in early …
South Korean author Cho Nam-joo: ‘My book is braver than I am’ Cho Nam-joo, 41, is a former television scriptwriter whose novel Kim Jiyoung, Born 1982 became a hotly debated bestseller in South Korea when it was p …
What books will keep my teenage nephew hooked on reading? Q: My 19-year-old nephew has rediscovered his love of reading, thanks to David Nicholls. (“I just lolled in One Day!” he texted. Then he was gripped.) …
Home listening: Howard Skempton piano works and more • Howard Skempton’s 24 Preludes and Fugues for piano, performed by William Howard (Orchid Classics), for whom they were written, take inspiration from …
Leïla Slimani: ‘This book is a mirror to make the elite look reality in the face’ Leïla Slimani is running late. She texts to say she’s waiting for her children’s nanny to arrive. Can this be true? Does the writer whose bestselling …
Actress by Anne Enright review – boundless emotional intelligence Anne Enright’s new novel opens with a question: “People ask me, ‘What was she like?’ and I try to figure out if they mean as a normal person: what was …
Moses Boyd: Dark Matter review – party-facing solo debut Summary: Moses Boyd is a drummer in the same way Questlove from the Roots is a drummer, which is to say that the twice Mobo-winning 28-year-old Londoner is a p …
James Blunt review – beige balladeer turns up the self-deprecating charm Summary: Having a global smash as couple-friendly as You’re Beautiful would often cast a singer-songwriter as gooey but wearily earnest “serious artist”. But J …
Justin Bieber: Changes review – mid-tempo wedded bliss Nothing frames a pop album quite like a redemption narrative, and for Justin Bieber this is his second in a row. While 2015’s Purpose, preceded by pro …
The Sisters Grimm by Menna van Praag review – girl powers The fictional worlds of Menna van Praag have often whispered with voices of the fantastic. Her first novel, The House at the End of Hope Street (2013) …
Beach Bunny: Honeymoon review – a short, sweet blast of sunny indie-pop What began in 2015 as a bedroom project for Chicago-based Lili Trifilio had become something of an online phenomenon by the time 2018’s self-released …
Do people in prison matter less in an emergency than those who are free? There is one image from the bushfire crisis that I am still not able to shake. It has led to night terrors where I wake in a sweat, feeling embers on …
Antonia Gransden obituary Summary: My friend Antonia Gransden, who has died aged 91, was among the foremost medievalists of her generation. Her substantial and sustained scholarship spa …
‘I was a bad influence on the Beatles': James Taylor on Lennon, love and recovery James Taylor looks out at the sprawling London skyline. “This is where it started,” he says. “The moment.” He made his first trip here in 1968, playin …
Antisocial: How Online Extremists Broke America by Andrew Marantz – review Andrew Marantz is a staff writer for the New Yorker, and a pretty good one. He’s written a lot of perceptive stuff about the tech industry in recent y …
Bradford puts money on libraries to boost city's health The library at Thebes was said to have the inscription “Medicine for the soul” above its doors – a notion Bradford council is set to put to the test w …
The best books about new beginnings Eat, Pray, Love by Elizabeth Gilbert has long been the hoary cliche of new starts, the story of a woman who apparently can’t find any decent Italian f …
Immense. Harrowing. Exhilarating: pianist Igor Levit on Beethoven's sonatas Opus 2, No 2. The early A major sonata. Four movements with some 23 minutes of music. Surely one of the young Beethoven’s finest and most ingenious cr …
Poem of the week: Bright is the Ring of Words by Robert Louis Stevenson Summary: Bright is the Ring of Words Bright is the ring of words When the right man rings them, Fair the fall of songs When the singer sings them. Still they a …
Leah Fritz obituary My friend Leah Fritz, who has died aged 88, was an American writer known for her support of the civil rights, peace and feminist movements. In her two …
Hundreds of readers donate copies of depression memoir after Caroline Flack's death Summary: An independent bookseller has been deluged with thousands of requests after offering to send anyone who feels they need one a copy of Matt Haig’s memo …
Andrew Weatherall, British producer behind Screamadelica, dies aged 56 Andrew Weatherall, the British musician, DJ and record producer known for helming Primal Scream’s Screamadelica, has died aged 56. His management wrot …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start with AbsoluteBeginner76 who has been e …
Andrew Weatherall: lone swordsman who cut new shapes for British music Summary: There was a point, quite early on in Andrew Weatherall’s career, when vast commercial success appeared to beckon him. Already an acclaimed DJ and remi …
LSO/Rattle review – volatile, politically charged Berg and Beethoven When Schiller addressed his Ode to Joy to “you millions” rather than the privileged few, he made it political. Beethoven’s setting of it as the last m …
Banoffee on trauma and transformation: 'Reshaping myself helped me survive' Summer sunlight filters through a large gumtree in her family’s backyard, as Martha Brown’s dog Story cruises for pats. It’s an idyllic scene, but for …
'A wonderfully creative DJ': readers' tributes to Andrew Weatherall ‘A really important artist for a whole generation of Brits’ Damn, I really can’t believe this … Weatherall deeply impacted me, my life course and, of …
Tyll by Daniel Kehlmann review – plague, war and practical jokes Time and again, Daniel Kehlmann’s novels feature an artist whose success depends on leaving his wife and children. (His last book broke with the formu …
Poetry book of the month: Wing by Matthew Francis – review Summary: It is becoming harder to find modern poetry that is unequivocally at the service of nature. I am not sure why the ability to observe in an unmediated …
Brit awards 2020: who will win every award … and who should Group of the year Coldplay Foals Bring Me the Horizon D-Block Europe Bastille Speaking from the venal, artistically disinterested, industry-beancounte …
Ozzy Osbourne cancels US tour due to ongoing ill health Ozzy Osbourne has cancelled his North American tour to undergo treatment amid a continuing period of poor health. A statement on his website says the …
True Grit author Charles Portis dies aged 86 Charles Portis, the reclusive author of the western True Grit, in which a 14-year-old girl sets out to avenge her father’s murder, has died at the age …
'The most boring part': why the killer didn't matter to Georges Simenon It isn’t normal to begin reviews of detective novels by discussing their last chapter. But Maigret and the Man on the Bench is not a normal detective …
Andrew Weatherall: 10 of his greatest tracks Primal Scream – Loaded (1990) No matter how many dodgy rootin-tootin’ singles or car-crash gigs they get through, Primal Scream have limitless goodwil …
Andrew Weatherall obituary Summary: The list of Andrew Weatherall’s achievements as DJ, musician, songwriter, producer and remixer could fill a hefty volume. His career took him from wor …
Västerås Sinfonietta/Crawford-Phillips review – a force of nature A programme whose theme was the force that is nature was all too apt for a weekend when storms were tyrannical. Under their chief conductor, Simon Cra …
Drill rapper Unknown T cleared of murder of student Unknown T, until recently one of the brightest prospects in the UK drill scene, has been cleared of murdering a university student at New Year’s Eve p …
Brit awards 2020: Lewis Capaldi tops winners alongside rap triumphs Scottish singer-songwriter Lewis Capaldi has topped the winners at the 2020 Brit awards, though a strong year for rap music prevented a clean sweep of …
Brit awards 2020: the winners and performances as they happened Summary: The era of #BritsSoWhite is long gone: with awards for Stormzy, Mabel and Dave, black British talent is finally getting the credit it deserves – and n …
Brits 2020: all the performances reviewed Mabel The Brits’ sole British female nominee in the mixed categories – for shame! – opens the show in some Timbalands and pink workwear, like she’s of …
Politics and powerful performances at the 2020 Brits – but no shock winners Summary: The row about female representation at the Brits was rumbling on unabated in the lead-up to the awards ceremony. The most recent contributions include …
Harry Styles 'threatened with knife during Valentine's Day mugging' Singer Harry Styles was reportedly mugged at knifepoint in London on Valentine’s Day. The 26-year old former One Direction member was “threatened with …
Dave attacks Boris Johnson in Brit awards performance: 'Our prime minister's a real racist' Summary: South London rapper Dave has accused Boris Johnson of being a racist on stage at the 2020 Brit awards. Performing Black, a freestyle track that charts …
Kim Jiyoung, Born 1982 review – South Korean #MeToo bestseller Summary: This Korean bestseller chronicles the everyday struggle of women against endemic sexism. Its provocative power springs from the same source as its tot …
The Crying Book by Heather Christle review – why do we weep? What makes you cry? Recently I cried when my eldest daughter won a medal in a gymnastics competition; during a conversation with my wife; and while wa …
Ut review – post-punk brutalists retain their stark, soulful power Veterans of a mid-80s underground scene that raised atonal, oppressive noise to a vital artform, Ut have retained their ability to unsettle and inspir …
Pearl Carr obituary Summary: In 1959 the husband and wife duo of Pearl Carr and Teddy Johnson were invited to look at songs with which they could represent the UK in the fourth st …
Pop star, producer or pariah? The conflicted brilliance of Grimes Grimes has always had a tortured relationship with visibility. No sooner had Claire Boucher broken beyond the Montreal warehouse scene at the turn of …
Should the Harvey Weinstein jury really be forbidden to review books? Summary: As the jury in Harvey Weinstein’s rape trial begin their deliberations, his defence lawyers launched a last-minute bid to to get one juror discharged …
Dave hailed for Brit awards protest against 'racist' Boris Johnson It has been described as “the most important performance in the history of the Brits” and “a necessary wake-up call in the most provocative way”. Afte …
Antisocial by Andrew Marantz review – America's online extremists Antisocial is, among other things, a tale of two Mikes. Mike Cernovich was a law student, nutrition blogger, self-help author and generic Twitter trol …
When Time Stopped by Ariana Neumann review – an extraordinary Holocaust story Getting to know your parents can take a lifetime, especially if they are secretive about their past. That her father, Hans, was more than a philanthro …
The Strokes review – New York's ultimate hipsters set the crowd alight A few years back, GQ magazine ran a feature headlined “The fifteen-year decline of the Strokes”, outlining the ways the New York quintet had disappoin …
Amnesty by Aravind Adiga review – a migrant’s tale Summary: Every migrant, as Salman Rushdie has observed, is a fantasist. But so is every novelist. Both pursue dreams of another world, inside books or across b …
Eminem: his 30 greatest tracks, ranked! 30. Rap God (2013) Eminem illustrates all the cadences he has mastered over the years, channelling flows from influences such as Tech N9ne and Big Pun …
'Vagina is not a rude word': the scientist fighting to empower women, one word at a time Catherine Blackledge immediately knew what her first book, a cultural history of the vagina spanning more than two millennia, should be called: Vagina …
Stormzy receives first Greggs ‘black card’ handing him free pastries for life He had the first UK No 1 of the decade and was named best male artist at the Brit awards this week. But now Stormzy may have clinched the ultimate acc …
Bezuidenhout: Beethoven Piano Concertos 2 and 5 review – boisterous and charming Summary: Hopefully you are not sick of Beethoven yet in his 250th anniversary year, because there are plenty of recordings to come that you might not have real …
The Brit awards have become a platform for black politics – and brilliance The Brits are no stranger to protest or political statement: the 1996 ceremony contained both, with Jarvis Cocker driven to moon Michael Jackson over …
‘It feels like an extra limb’ – musicians on the bond with their instruments Summary: One thing successful musicians have to do a lot of is travel, and when you travel with an instrument, you increase its chances of getting damaged. Ear …
That not-so-old black magic: how African mysticism returned to pop In west Africa, juju, also known as black magic, is the indigenous belief system in the ability of the spiritual world to impact on the physical one. …
The Mercies by Kiran Millwood Hargrave review – a witch-hunt tale for our times There has been a vogue in the past few years for novels about gender and sexuality set in early modern Scandinavia: Hannah Kent’s Burial Rites, Sally …
The Orielles: the hotly tipped band leaving Halifax for the stars Twenty minutes into the gong bath, Orielles vocalist and bassist Esmé Hand-Halford knew that she was ready to do her vocal take. Stockport’s Eve Studi …
Pulled By Magnets: Rose Golden Doorways review – an ear-tricking blizzard of sound Seb Rochford is best known as leader of the post-jazz outfit Polar Bear and co-founder of the punk-jazzers Acoustic Ladyland, as well as being a found …
Ozzy Osbourne: Ordinary Man review – his final statement? Given his recent tribulations – notably his diagnosis with Parkinson’s – it’s hardly surprising that there is a sometimes elegiac feel to Ozzy Osbourn …
Sightless Pit: Grave of a Dog review – witchy trio unleash hell Summary: ‘When shall we three meet again in thunder, lightning or in rain?” That’s what you can imagine this decidedly witchy trio saying to each other after f …
King Krule: Man Alive! review – disgust, dissolution and despair King Krule, AKA 25-year-old south London native Archy Marshall, has always let his work sprawl. His 2013 debut, 6 Feet Beneath the Moon, was a stagger …
Is being the 'voice of a generation' a curse or an honour for novelists? Sally Rooney doesn’t come across as someone who spends a lot of time on Snapchat. There is no scene in her 2018 novel Normal People where her protagon …
Tracks of the week reviewed: US Girls, Jake Shears, Grimes US Girls 4 American Dollars In a comparison of the presidential candidates’ campaign rally playlists, the progressive Bernie Sanders came off unusuall …
Tender Is the Flesh by Agustina Bazterrica review – a prizewinning Argentinian dystopia “There are words that cover up the world,” thinks the protagonist of this prizewinning Argentinian dystopia. In our world of industrialised farming, w …
'Pyke notte thy nostrellys': 15th-century guide on children's manners digitised for first time From Horrid Henry to Just William, naughty children are not difficult to find in children’s books today. But bad behaviour isn’t confined to recent de …
Supergrass review – joyous return for one of the UK's greatest singles bands One quality among many that defines Supergrass is their sense of humour. Note that the title track from their second and arguably best album, 1997’s I …
Everything we wanted: the race to find the next Billie Eilish Last week, Billie Eilish released her masterfully mournful Bond theme, No Time to Die – a huge swoop of a song that wants to bottle a feeling of timel …
Dan Brown announces debut picture book – soundtracked by the author Just like his hero Robert Langdon, who combines an eidetic memory with an uncanny knack for solving mysteries, incredible swimming skills and the abil …
Flight Lines: the heroic story of two migratory shorebirds – and the man who followed them Nearly 20 years ago, in pursuit of a different sort of life, I spent six months commuting between Brisbane and Robbins Island, a remote chunk of priva …
Suffrage review: epic retelling of US women's long battle for the vote It was a decidedly anticlimactic end to a life-changing campaign. The document was sent by train to Washington in the middle of the night. A governmen …
Unfree Speech by Joshua Wong review – a young life of protest in Hong Kong Since June 2019 Hong Kong has been – first figuratively, then literally – on fire. What began as a “summer of discontent” has become a running street …
Nixon in China review –  a gripping human drama Ask a Chinese person, or one trusted to speak to tourists, about the current status of Mao Zedong – founder of the People’s Republic of China, propone …
One to watch: Kamaiyah Back in 2016, the California rapper Kamaiyah released one of the most exciting debut mixtapes of the year. A Good Night in the Ghetto put the then sec …
The Murder Capital review – people really need this band Something is happening to boys in bands up and down the country and across the Irish Sea. They are singing about things that matter, such as mental he …
‘It changed my life’: Edmund de Waal on writing The Hare With Amber Eyes It was difficult. I was making the most complex work of my life: an installation of 450 porcelain vessels for a red aluminium shelf 50m above the entr …
Nightingale by Marina Kemp review – a deft debut Novels set around the Mediterranean tend to unfold over a summer, and involve newcomers to the area (often from colder climes) having seminal experien …
Pop music needs a new kick up the arse, says the Damned’s punk pioneer It was the first punk single, a tune that influenced a generation of young people disaffected by early 70s manufactured pop and rock. Now the man who …
Which books will broaden the mind of my Daily Mail-reading father? Q: I’d like advice on a book to give my dad for a present. He’s a Daily Mail reader in his 50s and very stubborn. I’d like to give him something that …
Graeme Armstrong: ‘When I stopped taking drugs, I felt a kind of loneliness’ Graeme Armstrong, 28, grew up in Airdrie, east of Glasgow. He was involved with gang culture from a young age. Expelled from school in his mid-teens, …
Day on the Green review: a-ha return with a melancholy take on their 80s hits Summary: The Norwegian band a-ha first toured Australia in 1986, appearing to adoring teenage fans on Countdown. As with international acts such as ABBA and Ma …
Home listening: Bach, Haydn, Mozart and more • In nearly half a century since the Belgian conductor Philippe Herreweghe began performing Bach’s St John Passion (in the earliest performances he sh …
‘It was so emotional’: the duo who helped rapper Dave stun the Brits Amber Rimell and Bronski were in their studio when a call came through last December. The 21-year-old rapper, Dave, had been asked to perform at the B …
Vexed by James Mumford review – provocative plea for political nuance Brendon Kaluza-Graham was born in Spokane, Washington, to parents who were just 14 and 16. His life was split between his separated mother and father …
Mel C speaks out: trying to be the perfect Spice Girl made me ill Melanie Chisholm, the former Spice Girl Mel C, dates her past struggle with eating disorders and depression back to an incident at a Brit awards cerem …
A Bite of the Apple by Lennie Goodings – essential literary memoir Lennie Goodings has had a long and highly respected career in publishing. She is chair of Virago Press, the pioneering publishing house that champions …
Searching for Sylvie Lee by Jean Kwok review – accusations, twists and revelations Jean Kwok – born in Hong Kong, raised in Brooklyn, based in the Netherlands – had a hit a decade ago with Girl in Translation, a novel inspired by her …
Bobby Gillespie remembers Andrew Weatherall: ‘He was a true bohemian’ Summary: I first heard of Andrew Weatherall back in the summer of 1989, when he wrote about his favourite tracks of the time in the Boy’s Own fanzine. To our s …
Supergrass: ‘We’ve always been about manic energy’ In a way, it’s incredible that Supergrass lasted as long as they did. That they survived the mania of Britpop having bounced into mainstream conscious …
Thomas Piketty: Why France’s ‘rock star economist’  still wants to squeeze the rich Seven years ago a French economist named Thomas Piketty published a book entitled Capital in the Twenty-First Century. It was 700 pages long and featu …
‘You’re one of the more normal composers’: Simon Rattle and Thomas Adès swap notes One titan in the room is a challenge. A pair threatens to be a crush. Classical music has many stars. Yet true creative thinkers, who mould the cultur …
Michael Ball and Alfie Boe review – dulcet bromance hits the high notes Michael Ball and Alfie Boe’s business is booming. The stage veterans, who first met in 2007 during an unloved ENO production of Kismet, know a thing o …
Zara Steiner obituary Zara Steiner, who has died aged 91, was the world’s leading historian of international relations in Europe between the wars. Her two massive and magis …
King Krule: Man Alive! review – stirring, dreamy optimism Archy Marshall has been refining his woozy, washed-out sounds since he emerged back in 2010. With each release under his King Krule moniker, he has sh …
The Mirror & the Light by Hilary Mantel review – Cromwell’s end So the trilogy is complete, and it is magnificent. The portrait of Thomas Cromwell that began with Wolf Hall (2009) and continued with Bring Up the Bo …
Untold Night and Day by Bae Suah review – a dreamlike quest Untold Night and Day was first published in Korea in 2013 and is the fourth of Bae Suah’s novels – which number more than a dozen – to be translated i …
Gürzenich O Köln/Roth review – inventive and compelling Beethoven tribute There are more than 10 months still to go, but if anyone comes up with a more inventive way of celebrating Beethoven’s 250th anniversary year than Fra …
Total Immersion: Anders Hillborg review – deep dive into a demanding and fascinating body of work ‘I write pieces because fantastic musicians ask me to,” Anders Hillborg told the audience, with disarming charm, at the first concert of the BBC Symph …
Poem of the week: Daft Patter by Barry MacSweeney Daft Patter If anyone knows about sullen loneliness, you do Yet there’s a grin in the wind, heartless and cold There’s dark in the darkness, beauty of …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup The Memory Wood Sam Lloyd Bantam Press, £12.99, pp384 Elissa Mirzoyan is 13. She has been kidnapped from outside the chess tournament she was competin …
The Script review – stadium rock at its most cliched Irish trio the Script were Los Angeles-based songwriters for Britney Spears and Boyz II Men before the 2008 international smash The Man Who Can’t Be M …
Justin Bieber breaks US chart record held by Elvis Presley Justin Bieber has broken a US chart record set by Elvis Presley 59 years ago, by becoming the youngest artist to score seven No 1 albums. Bieber, 25, …
These New Puritans review – frustratingly unfinished symphonies As restless souls with voracious creative appetites, These New Puritans’ previous appearances at the Barbican saw their ranks bolstered by children’s …
As Hay festival opens in the UAE, authors condemn free speech abuses As bestselling authors from Jung Chang to Bernardine Evaristo prepare to gather in Abu Dhabi for the first Hay festival in the United Arab Emirates, l …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s begin at The Beginning Of Spring by Penelope …
'Selling it would be like removing part of my soul': readers on the bond with their instruments ‘I fell in love with her at first sight’ Pearl, my Epiphone FT- 150 jumbo steel string guitar is what I’d rescue first from a fire. She’s the only ins …
Elizabeth Cook obituary Elizabeth Cook, who has died aged 81, was a music teacher of particular energy, intelligence and empathy. As head of music at Tapton secondary school, …
Hurricane Season by Fernanda Melchor review – intense and inventive A structurally inventive murder mystery set in a lawless Mexican village rife with superstition, Fernanda Melchor’s formidable English-language debut …
House of Glass by Hadley Freeman review – flight and fight of a Jewish family Deep inside her paternal grandmother’s closet, behind the leather handbags, the elegant dresses wrapped in dry-cleaner plastic, all giving off a whiff …
The Angel Esmeralda review –  slender DeLillo fable fails to take operatic flight Lliam Paterson’s The Angel Esmeralda was commissioned by Scottish Opera while he was its young composer in residence. But why it’s now receiving its w …
NHKSO/Gabetta/Järvi review – spirited Schumann and driving Takemitsu Summary: Paavo Järvi’s first European tour with Tokyo’s NHK Symphony Orchestra, three years ago, featured sensitively played Takemitsu and driven, exciting Mah …
Opera's rising star: Lise Davidsen on learning to handle the high life I’m pretty sure the man who’s very politely shunting Lise Davidsen out of our Royal Opera House interview room to make way for an audit meeting doesn’ …
Rathbones Folio prize: Zadie Smith makes female-dominated shortlist Summary: Zadie Smith and Forward prize winner Fiona Benson are among six female authors shortlisted for this year’s Rathbones Folio prize, which has not yet be …
Our Bodies, Their Battlefield by Christina Lamb review – groundbreaking on women and war As a junior researcher on a TV documentary in Uganda in 1986, I was told to ask a question that was the dark cliche of war reporting: “Anyone here bee …
Theft by Luke Brown review – black comedy of sexualised class war The narrator of Luke Brown’s second novel is “a white male from the north of England, small town, moribund, working class-cum-middle-class … a reader, …
Secondhand by Adam Minter review – the new global garage sale For the American business journalist Adam Minter, the afterlife of our possessions is personal. His great-grandfather was a small-time junkyard dealer …
David Roback: hallucinatory guitarist still sending pop into a dream To the outside world at least, the late David Roback was a wilfully mysterious figure. He appeared to hate talking about himself. The journalists who …
Game of Thrones honoured in new classification of pterosaur George RR Martin is celebrating after a palaeontologist, who named a new genus of pterosaur after the dragons of House Targaryen, agreed with him that …
Mick Fleetwood review – rousing all-star celebration of Peter Green Mick Fleetwood has enjoyed a long and impressive career, though this is surely one of the highlights. A tall, bearded figure, he sits behind his drum …
Paul Kirschner obituary Paul Kirschner, who has died aged 87, was an academic and expert on the works of the writer Joseph Conrad. Born on the Lower East Side of New York, to …
Duffy has made peace. But social media won't let her Summary: Duffy’s statement regarding her horrific sexual assault was striking not only for its bravery, but for being so direct. This was a radically unfiltere …
From climate collapse to generation rent: coming-of-age novels have changed forever In simpler times, you could rely on a coming-of-age novel to be narrated by a teenager whose journey through the phoney adult world would culminate in …
Here We Are by Graham Swift review – a tale of magic, love and loss The story unfolds as if we’re watching it through glass. Evie White, widow of the actor Jack Robbins, goes out for lunch on the first anniversary of h …
Kraftwerk by Uwe Schütte review – a band that saw the future Kraftwerk’s Ralf Hütter once told a journalist that his group’s 23-minute-long song about car travel “Autobahn” was an attempt to answer the question: …
James Newman: My Last Breath – UK Eurovision 2020 entry is serviceably bland Only a demented optimist doesn’t feel a sense of hopelessness overwhelm them as the UK’s entry for Eurovision 2020 appears. In fairness to James Newma …
Jay-Z files second lawsuit against 'barbaric' Mississippi prison Jay-Z has filed a civil lawsuit against the Mississippi Department of Corrections on behalf of 152 inmates at a state prison, alleging “barbaric” cond …
Sleater-Kinney review – versatile guitar heroes reach perfection The creative reinvention Sleater-Kinney undertook when joining forces with producer Annie Clark (AKA high conceptualist St Vincent) for their ninth al …
Tears at bedtime: are children's books on environment causing climate anxiety? I’m reading one of a small forest’s-worth of beautiful new picture books about the environment with my eight-year-old twins. The Sea, by Miranda Krest …
Caribou: Suddenly review – perfectly imperfect pop Some artists’ careers seem to progress according to a carefully calculated plan, and there are others whose career seems to progress as a result of ha …
The devil's in the detail: what makes forensic science 'forensic'? This week the UK’s forensic science regulator, Dr Gillian Tully, said the service was operating “on a knife-edge”, which you would expect it to do if …
Waterstones defends minimum wage in year of record profits Summary: Waterstones chief executive James Daunt has hit back at campaigners who continue to call on the bookselling chain to pay all staff a living wage, sayi …
Clive Cussler obituary The prolific and popular novelist Clive Cussler, who has died aged 88, combined adventure and technology into fast-paced thrillers. Ubiquitous and eas …
LPO/Vänskä review – understated dexterity meets energy and fire The centrepiece of Osmo Vänskä’s first concert in the London Philharmonic’s 2020 Vision series was Louis Spohr’s rarely heard Second Violin Concerto, …
Dan Sultan charged with indecent assault by Victoria police Musician Dan Sultan has cancelled all of his upcoming performances after he was charged with indecent assault by Victoria police. The blues and rock s …
Halsey, pop's new firebrand: 'Nobody wants to be my friend. I'm drama by association' There are two security gates protecting Halsey’s home in the winding hills of Los Angeles. You clear the first, then you wait as the next is released …
Out of Darkness, Shining Light by Petina Gappah review – a journey across colonial Africa Summary: Western history builds up its great men with sleight-of-hand, nudging our attention away from all the things we’re not supposed to see, while it keeps …
Myrkur: Folkesange review – Danish black metaller makes dense, intense folk Plait-wearing girls knitting on mountaintops don’t usually feature on the albums of black metal artists, unless they’re shot in stark monochrome and l …
Parisian Lives by Deidre Bair review – deliciously indiscreet about Beckett and De Beauvoir When Samuel Beckett agreed to let Deirdre Bair write his biography, everyone assumed it was because he was sleeping with her. The year was 1971 and th …
Soccer Mommy: Color Theory review – grief and depression given glorious voice Summary: Many people who have had to contend with depression will recognise little truths leaping out at them from the second album by Sophie Allison, under th …
Vladislav Delay: Rakka review – techno from the end of the world Summary: Most people tend to start out angry at injustice in the world, and then have that anger pared down by the passage of time until they’re playing golf a …
The Orielles: Disco Volador review – taking cosmic pop to new galaxies Summary: British music fans have an insatiable appetite for cosmic indie pop. Broadcast, Stereolab and the Beta Band infused it with rich sociopolitical ideas …
Haleek Maul: Errol review – rapper rattles past teen angst Back in 2012, aged just 16, Bajan-American rapper Malik Hall, AKA Haleek Maul, was making downtempo, introspective rap probing the sulky, nocturnal mu …
Anne Enright: ‘A lot of bad things happen to women in books. Really a lot’ When Anne Enright began writing her latest novel Actress in 2016, a story of the dark side of showbusiness with a full cast of sleazebags and sexual p …
Tracks of the week reviewed: the Weeknd, Selena Gomez, the Strokes Summary: The Weeknd After Hours I don’t usually like to encourage artists who release six-minute songs, but let’s make an exception for the Weeknd who has, onc …
An Evening With Whitney review – Houston hologram is ghoulish cash-in ‘Welcome to Whitney Houston, very much alive,” says the star of the show, except she isn’t Houston. The American singer died aged 48 in 2012, yet has …
‘Surreal immediacy’: how a 1,000-page novel became a 45-hour audiobook Summary: Finishing a good book should leave you feeling bereft for a little while, but it’s rare to leave a novel with your brain vibrating at a different freq …
Denis & Katya review – Venables turns real-life tragedy into chilling opera Romeo and Juliet crossed with Bonnie and Clyde: Denis Muravyov and Katya Vlasova were both innocent and transgressive. Music Theatre Wales’s UK premie …
'It's terrifying': why young pop stars are suddenly playing arenas Picking up an honour earlier this month at LA’s Pollstar awards, which celebrate achievements in live music, Elton John delivered some advice. “To peo …
'Extinction is a choice’: Margaret Atwood on Tasmania's forests and saving the swift parrot We stand under the bird viewing platform, the wind blowing, the giant white gum trees towering. Margaret Atwood, her face partly hidden beneath a blac …
'I bet Bon Scott is pissing himself': the AC/DC covers gig shutting down a major Perth highway Summary: It may be a celebration of a uniquely Western Australian cult figure, but Highway To Hell – the Perth festival’s closing gambit for 2020, which will s …
Novelist Marian Keyes to headline Primadonna literary festival The award-winning novelist Marian Keyes has been announced as one of the headline acts at a feminist literary festival where women are being encourage …
Why do I always pack too many books when going on holiday? I’m writing this from a coffee shop in Inglewood, Los Angeles. For this, my one‑week holiday, I packed seven books. What was I thinking? My suitcase w …
House of Glass by Hadley Freeman review – a captivating family memoir Hadley Freeman’s captivating family memoir inscribes itself in the pantheon of family stories that connect the grandchild to the generation of the gra …
Quentin Blake: ‘Spend time with children? Good God, no' The writer and illustrator Quentin Blake lives in west London in a pretty 19th-century square that has its own private gardens. Every morning, the 87- …
Tribes by David Lammy review – how to mend our divided society On 16 April 2018 David Lammy, barrister and MP for Tottenham, delivered a parliamentary speech excoriating the government for its mistreatment of memb …
The week in classical: Madam Butterfly; The Angel Esmeralda – review Summary: Iridescent blue, bilious green, orange, violet, black, blood-red. In English National Opera’s spectacular staging of Puccini’s Madam Butterfly (1904), …
One to watch: Sofia Kourtesis Summary: Listen to the opening number of the Peruvian-born producer Sofia Kourtesis’s first, self-titled EP, and you imagine a train made of rackety sonic junk …
Sleater-Kinney review: an all-change powerhouse of a gig Some bands are just bands. Most of the good ones, however, represent something beyond a unit that plays some tunes. They become an anchor point for a …
The gospel according to … the classical orchestra that’s just been converted Summary: Britain’s most acclaimed classical orchestra is to take its first step into the world of gospel music on Sunday in a ground-breaking, sold-out choral …
Book clinic: I’m tired of gloomy books – are there any happy literary novels? Q: I’m tired of sad and depressing themes, but want something that’s not a romcom in book form. Are there any happy novels that are also literary? Ano …
John Carey: ‘In my teens I fancied myself as a poet’ The critic John Carey, 85, is emeritus Merton professor of English literature at Oxford University, where he taught for more than 40 years. He has wri …
Grimes: Miss Anthropocene review –  a deep, dark trip “I’ll never be your dream girl,” sang Grimes on the last line of her aggressively poppy 2015 album Art Angels. On her fifth record, the Canadian produ …
The Mirror and the Light by Hilary Mantel review – a shoo-in for the Booker prize When Hilary Mantel gave her BBC Reith lectures in 2017 on the subject of historical fiction, she was asked by one audience member if she was really wr …
Mary Beard blocked by No 10 as British Museum trustee 'for pro-Europe views' She is Britain’s best known classicist, a Cambridge don with formidable intellect and a knack for getting people interested in all things ancient. Tha …
Cornershop's Tjinder Singh: 'My dad said, 'They’ll not always want you here'. That stuck' Tjinder Singh, the frontman of Cornershop, hasn’t been home for nearly a decade. To get to Wednesfield in the West Midlands, you drive east out of Wol …
This Lovely City by Louise Hare review – passion and prejudice It’s 1950, nearly two years after the HMT Empire Windrush deposited Lawrie Matthews in the motherland, and still he’s stunned by the many ways in whic …
Elvis Costello review – electric atmosphere in barnstorming show Elvis Costello cemented his reputation with his first five albums that channelled the energy of the punk era into classic songwriting. Since then, he …
Stereophonics review – back-to-basics rock and singalongs heard for miles There’s an eerie agelessness to Stereophonics. Two decades on from what might be considered their heyday, they are touring yet another No 1 album – Ki …
Broken Greek by Pete Paphides review – a smash hit If you’re going to give your memoir the sublime subtitle “A story of chip shops and pop songs”, you had better serve up a tasty hit. Gloriously, the m …
Sava Peić obituary My friend Sava Peić, who has died aged aged 81, played a big part in the development of the British Library’s Balkan collections. He also spent much o …
Akademie für Alte Musik Berlin/Faust review – clarity and dazzling performances It’s hard to think of any other leading violinist today who moves as comfortably as Isabelle Faust does between the 19th and 20th-century repertoire a …
In brief: When Time Stopped; The Book of Echoes; The Adventures of Maud West, Lady Detective – reviews When Time Stopped: A Memoir of My Father’s War and What Remains Ariana Neumann Scribner, £16.99, pp368 Journalist Ariana Neumann grew up in Caracas as …
Real Estate: The Main Thing review – artfully polished tedium Three albums of catchily jangling indie into their career, New Jersey’s Real Estate parted ways with founding member and lead guitarist Matt Mondanile …
English Monsters by James Scudamore review – beautifully paced and well observed Spare a thought for James Scudamore, whose fourth novel is published on the same day as Hilary Mantel’s The Mirror and the Light. At least Mantel has …
Independence Square by AD Miller review –  the orange revolution unpeeled Summary: A voluptuous unease informs the mood of Independence Square, AD Miller’s third novel, which makes a partial return to the Russian state gangsterism of …
Public Enemy fire Flavor Flav after clash over Bernie Sanders rally Public Enemy have fired founder member Flavor Flav following a dispute over the group performing at a Bernie Sanders rally, bringing to an end one of …
Michael Kiwanuka review – soul's troubled man speaks truth to power After two Brit award nominations and the critical rapture that greeted Michael Kiwanuka’s third album – Kiwanuka, which reached No 2 in November – thi …
Fidelio review – Davidsen approaches greatness in uneven production Tobias Kratzer’s new production of Fidelio turns Beethoven’s only opera into a parable about the nature of political engagement and our frequent compl …
50 great tracks for March by Christine and the Queens, Yves Tumor, Fizzler and more Christine and the Queens – I Disappear in Your Arms What is better than a great song? A great song in two languages, each offering a different perspec …
Changing the record: why High Fidelity's gender swap is perfectly timed It was perhaps always a given that High Fidelity, the much-loved-Nick Hornby-novel-turned-Hollywood-romcom, would be turned into a television series – …
Tones and I review – Dance Monkey star reaches biggest stage yet Dance Monkey, the song that changed Toni Watson’s life, was the byproduct of an unhappy episode while she was busking in Byron Bay, New South Wales. H …
'The road will kill you': why older musicians are cancelling tours In a chilling quote from much-loved music documentary The Last Waltz, about The Band’s final concert in 1976, leader Robbie Robertson looks straight i …
Deborah Dugan: suspended Grammys chief fired after misconduct investigation Deborah Dugan, who had been suspended from her position as president and chief executive of the Recording Academy, has now seen her contract officiall …
Women's prize for fiction lines up 'heavy hitters' on 2020 longlist Summary: The Mirror and the Light isn’t published until Thursday, but the conclusion to Hilary Mantel’s Wolf Hall trilogy has already made the longlist for the …
Down the Cosmic Hole: are Berlin's 56-hour party people facing their last dance? It is 1am on a Saturday and the crowd outside Berlin LGBTQ+ club night Cocktail d’Amore stretches from the door of its venue, Griessmuehle, along the …
The Quarry by Ben Halls review – men on the margins The enterprising imprint Dialogue Books was set up in 2017 to showcase marginalised voices. It’s tempting to see its publication of Ben Halls’s impres …
Dragman by Steven Appleby review – a secret identity with a difference Fans of Steven Appleby’s brilliant cartoons know already of their unique energy; what Posy Simmonds calls his “nimble, nubbly line” seems almost to vi …
The month's best mixes: romantic grime, reverberant birdsong and more Elijah & Skilliam: Valentines Rhythm & grime is the genre that never quite was. The term was coined in the early to mid 00s when grime producers DVA, …
Reading group: which climate science fiction should we read in March? For this month’s reading group, we’re after nominations for science fiction books that have something to say about the climate crisis. It’s been a whi …
Lewis Capaldi review – the tears of pop's characterful clown As Lewis Capaldi is fond of observing, he’s the last person you’d expect to become the biggest new pop star in the country. With his satin tour jacket …
'A generation that decided to fight': making music amid chaos in Venezuela ‘Everything here happens at gunpoint,” someone tells me when I arrive in Caracas. Venezuela is in crisis, suffering from a lack of power, water and ba …
Hilary Mantel says 'invective' against Meghan is partly due to racism Hilary Mantel has said that racism has been an element in the “invective” against Meghan, Duchess of Sussex. The novelist, who is about to publish the …
Fresh call for Oxford dictionaries to change 'sexist' definitions The leaders of Women’s Aid and the Women’s Equality party are among the signatories to an open letter calling on Oxford University Press to change its …
Our House Is on Fire by Greta Thunberg et al review – a family and planet in crisis A movement born without a face tends to acquire one. Since August 2018, when 15-year-old Greta Thunberg began a solo “school strike for the climate”, …
Damascus by Christos Tsiolkas review – the gory birth of Christianity Christianity stands on a foundational irony: the world-revolutionary creed of universal love emerged from a social and political ferment of rancour, h …
Prog rock stars Genesis announce reunion The British prog rock band Genesis have announced that they will reunite for a series of UK stadium shows in November and December. “There’s a Genesis …
'It's hopeful and generous': Thurston Moore's experimental record shop Thurston Moore is sitting in his shop window, pricing up a pile of records and telling me how Sun Ra used to operate. “Before he was going on tour, to …
London book fair cancelled over coronavirus fears, amid growing anger One of the world’s biggest international literary events, the London book fair, has been cancelled over coronavirus fears, amid growing anger that the …
Spacefarers by Christopher Wanjek review – getting practical about our future beyond Earth In 2007, China demonstrated a new anti-satellite missile by blowing one of its own defunct weather satellites to smithereens: a cloud of shards that s …
Top 10 mentors in fiction From Lord of the Rings and Star Wars to Harry Potter and 50 Shades of Grey, the most popular narratives often feature a mentor figure offering advice …
Appropriation or plagiarism? Booker novel poses difficult question Writing in the Observer in 1980, Martin Amis took to task a young New York-based writer, Jacob Epstein, for plagiarising him. In Wild Oats, Epstein ha …
Paul Addison obituary When Paul Addison, who has died aged 76 after suffering from cancer, embarked on studying the politics of the second world war, there were few scholar …
'I've been waiting years for this’: midnight queues as The Mirror & the Light finally hits shelves Summary: Almost 500 years after Thomas Cromwell was imprisoned in the Tower of London, the 1,000-year-old site was illuminated on Wednesday evening with an ima …
Alanis Morissette review – Jagged Little Pill still cuts deep after 25 years In the 25 years since Jagged Little Pill made Alanis Morissette a household name, the album has been around the block a few times. There was an acoust …
Transphobia row leaves Scottish poetry scene in turmoil A bitter conflict is escalating in the Scottish literary scene with the Scottish Poetry Library (SPL) standing accused of “institutional transphobia” …
Broken Greek by Pete Paphides review – chip shops and pop music In early 1977, the single “When I Need You” by Leo Sayer spent three weeks at the top of the British charts. The song might now suggest a hacked-out b …
What is the difference between the words epidemic and pandemic? Is the coronavirus more scary if it’s called a “pandemic” rather than an “epidemic”? And what exactly is the difference? The “-demic” part comes from …
Oasis's greatest songs – ranked! 30. Lord Don’t Slow Me Down (2007) A stand-alone single that was reportedly removed from Don’t Believe the Truth to cut down on the number of Noel Gal …
Intan Paramaditha: 'We are always haunted by the road not taken' ‘Onism”, according to John Koenig’s Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows (an online “fictionary” for ineffable feelings), is “the frustration of being stuck …
Oprah admits to 'not looking for Latinx writers' as American Dirt controversy continues Oprah Winfrey has admitted that she is “guilty of not looking for Latinx writers” in a forthcoming episode of her influential book club, after her cho …
Beethoven: Piano Sonatas – Staier's period instrument performances are thoughtful and insightful Summary: Ein Neuer Weg (A New Way) is the title of Andreas Staier’s album, which brings together the piano works that Beethoven composed at the very beginning …
Jill Morrison obituary My mother, Jill Morrison, who has died aged 78, was a remarkable woman who managed to cope with a great tragedy in her life – the murder of one of her …
'TikTok we need to talk': Lizzo slams social media app for body shaming Lizzo has accused the social media app TikTok of body shaming after it deleted multiple videos of her in a bathing suit. “TikTok keeps taking down my …
Number of female UK songwriters jumps by 60% The number of female songwriters signing with UK rights organisation PRS for Music has increased by 60%, but they remain hugely outnumbered by their m …
Australian music prize: Sampa the Great becomes first artist to win prestigious award twice Australian hip-hop artist Sampa the Great has made history by becoming the first person to win the Australian music prize twice. Her 2019 album The Re …
Paul Kelly, Methyl Ethel, Odette and more: Australia's best new music for March Summary: L-Fresh the Lion ft Moza and Mirrah – Mother For fans of: The Love Below, De La Soul, Jurassic Five Elton John’s favourite Aussie hip-hop artist, L-Fr …
Hachette workers stage walkout to protest publication of Woody Allen memoir Dozens of Hachette employees staged a walkout of its New York City offices on Thursday in protest against the company’s decision to publish Woody Alle …
Blame it on Bernie: did Public Enemy really split over politics? The Democratic party primary season is a rancorous, high-stakes affair that divides families and ruptures friendships. This year’s campaign has the un …
'Conga line around the car park!' A week in the life of a British venue Regulars at the Brudenell Social Club in Leeds have all sorts of favourite memories of the venue. For some, it is the night Thee Oh Sees played in the …
From Watership Down to War Horse: books about heroic animals Beavers are heroes, as any Narnia fan will tell you. Now the news confirms what we have known since meeting Mr and Mrs Beaver in CS Lewis’s The Lion, …
Shakespeare in a Divided America by James Shapiro review – the Bard and the culture wars It is perhaps unsurprising that Shakespeare, the most canonical of dead white males, should feature in America’s culture wars. But why so prominently, …
Jhené Aiko: Chilombo review – sexual, spiritual and wildly over-long Prior to recording her third album, Jhené Aiko got immersed in the practice of sound healing. She incorporated the vibrational hum of crystal alchemy …
The Wandering by Intan Paramaditha review – existential journeys The Wandering is the Indonesian writer Intan Paramaditha’s first novel (her first story collection to appear in English, Apple & Knife, came out in 20 …
Paul Heaton & Jacqui Abbott: Manchester Calling review – rich vignettes on life's vagaries Paul Heaton recently remarked that if he’d known how well his songs would resonate with ordinary people up and down the country, he’d have written mor …
Lauv: How I’m Feeling review – voguish pop alienation and anxiety ‘Life ain’t easy these days,” sighs Lauv - AKA 25-year-old Ari Leff - on Changes, a track that covers the musician’s decision to medicate his mental h …
Sadie Jones: ‘I lied about reading Allen Ginsberg to win an argument’ Summary: The book I am currently reading The Shapeless Unease by Samantha Harvey, her memoir, in essays and fragments, about sleeplessness. It’s a claustrophob …
Disq: Collector review – bedroom rockers mope towards majesty Faced with bleak job prospects, corrupted politics and a planet in existential crisis, it’s no wonder young indie rockers are currently given to both …
Two-headed monster: the new trend for splitting albums in half Bad news: just when you thought that 2020 could not bring any more fresh misery, and as if streaming hasn’t made the traditional album release complic …
No more 'nagging wives': how Oxford Dictionaries is cleaning up sexist language Summary: In years past, a reader Googling the definition of “anatomy” on their phone would have found a couple of example sentences demonstrating how the word …
Ernesto Cardenal obituary In 1983 ministers of the revolutionary Sandinista government lined up on the tarmac to welcome Pope John Paul II on his first visit to Nicaragua. Mome …
Bard labour: boost workplace productivity 'by reading a poem' Those seeking to have more productive morning meetings are often advised to hold them standing up, keep them as short as possible and – in desperate t …
McCoy Tyner, revered jazz pianist, dies aged 81 Jazz pianist McCoy Tyner has died at the age of 81. The death of Tyner, known as one of the most influential figures in jazz, was announced on his Fac …
Hachette cancels plan to publish Woody Allen memoir Hachette has dropped plans to publish a memoir by Woody Allen, the Oscar-winning film director who has been accused of sexually abusing his daughter. …
The Girl With the Louding Voice by Abi Daré review – a tale to spark change “Nigeria is a country located in West Africa”: so begins the prologue of Abi Daré’s debut novel. The prologue is a brief excerpt from The Book of Nige …
Recollections of My Non-Existence by Rebecca Solnit review – memoir and male violence Summary: One Sunday in 1980, the 19-year-old Rebecca Solnit went to see the studio flat in San Francisco that would be her home for the next 26 years. She’d be …
Poem of the month: Nightingale by Deryn Rees-Jones Summary: Dear bird of the early hours, little sharp-beaked, brown bird, throat open, wise bird, jazz riff, cello start, sad techno, harder heart, self broken / …
The week in classical: Fidelio; London Philharmonic Orchestra/ Vänskä – review “Liberté, égalité, fraternité”. These are three foreign words a British audience is guaranteed to understand. This imperative of the French Revolution …
Big Thief review – subtle rockers make a grand noise Adrianne Lenker arrives on stage with her three bandmates to no fanfare except clamorous applause from the crowd. She’s the musical core of Big Thief, …
One to watch: Che Lingo In October last year, Che Lingo told the taste-making site Hypebeast that he had no plans to sign to a label. But when Hollywood actor Idris Elba come …
Carla Bley Trio: Life Goes On review – warm, spirited and even funny This set begins with the piano laying down the bass line for a simple blues. Before the last note of each phrase there is a tiny hesitation, just long …
Evie Wyld: ‘Women are always told to ignore their sixth sense’ Born in London, Evie Wyld, 39, grew up in Australia and south London, where she lives now. Her debut novel, After the Fire, a Still Small Voice (2009) …
Book clinic: which books examine modern masculinity? Q: Can you recommend fiction that addresses masculinity and what it means to be a man in Europe today? David, 29, London A: Darran Anderson is a write …
Chris Riddell’s tips for young artists: bunk off school sports and study Raymond Briggs A smattering of schoolboy truancy, followed by the guiding hand of The Snowman’s creator, Raymond Briggs, were both crucial in setting the children’s …
Noughts & Crosses author hits back at race-bait claims The author of Noughts & Crosses has defended her story against allegations that she is feeding racial division in Britain. Malorie Blackman took to Tw …
Home listening: Poulenc, Parry and a magnificent seven • In these grim times, with an epidemic lurking and floods rising, we could all do with something cheery to distract us. Thank goodness, then, for a n …
Toni Morrison: The Pieces I Am review – as elegant as its subject Summary: Completed shortly before her death, this artful documentary is a full-hearted, unequivocal celebration of the life and work of Nobel prize-winning aut …
Georgia Ruth: Mai review – lush Welsh pastorals and other odes to spring The surge of inventive modern folk from Cymru continues. Modern is a relative term, of course. Owen Shiers’s recent debut as Cynefin, Dilyn Afon, a be …
Our Bodies, Their Battlefield by Christina Lamb review – the eternal war against women Rape, writes Christina Lamb at the start of this deeply traumatic and important book, is “the cheapest weapon known to man”. It is also one of the old …
US Girls: Heavy Light review – a major talent doubles down Summary: The many albums of US Girls – Meghan Remy – could be summed up as a series of sound art installations evolving from experimentation into bold tunefuln …
Tribes by David Lammy review – absorbing analysis Summary: There has always been more than one David Lammy, but until I read this book I didn’t realise quite how many there were. To younger readers, he might b …
St John Passion review – immersive and communal  Bach staging is deeply touching James Conway presents Bach’s St John Passion as a communal reflection on faith, loss and mortality in his production for English Touring Opera, descri …
Stephen Malkmus: Traditional Techniques review – an enjoyable take on early-70s psych-folk Summary: Almost two decades into a solo career that appeared to have long ago lost its momentum amid a welter of endless, aimless jams, Stephen Malkmus has red …
Bina by Anakana Schofield review – admirable chutzpah Anakana Schofield’s last novel, Martin John, told the story of a mentally disturbed sex offender: serious but unsolemn, even comic at times, it was a …
Susanna review – young artists shine in cluttered Handel staging Welcome back to Covent Garden, Susanna. It has been 271 years since Handel’s oratorio last had an outing at the Royal Opera House, where it was premie …
Robert Glasper review – genre-blending jazz keeps chaos at bay On any given performance, a crowd can encounter several unpredictable versions of the pianist Robert Glasper. There is the studious interpreter, head …
Missy Mazzoli/Kelly Moran review – captivating musical alchemy Summary: The American composer Missy Mazzoli has said that her ideal listener would know nothing about her or her music before hearing it, removing any preconc …
Laurie Morgan obituary Summary: Laurie Morgan, who has died aged 93, was an influential member of the coterie of British jazz experimenters of the 1940s and 50s that most famously in …
Recollections of My Non-Existence by Rebecca Solnit review – figuring out what stories to tell There was a time when Rebecca Solnit was a kind of underground secret, like a cult band you had to seek out in obscure venues and only the cognoscenti …
All About Sarah by Pauline Delabroy-Allard review – love as an extreme sport Summary: Here’s a novelty: a book about love as utter abandonment of the self, love as capitulation, love as not only obsession but possession, which manages n …
Poem of the week: The Idler by Alice Dunbar Nelson The Idler An idle lingerer on the wayside’s road, He gathers up his work and yawns away; A little longer, ere the tiresome load Shall be reduced to as …
'It's a case of holding your nerve': festivals face coronavirus insurance disaster The postponement of Ultra music festival in Miami and the cancellation of SXSW in Austin came in swift succession last week – the first two major musi …
Laszlo Heltay obituary My friend Laszlo Heltay, who has died aged 89, was a conductor and choral director who was instrumental in setting up the Academy of St Martin’s choir …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start with an old favourite. AbsoluteBeginne …
Ash: how we made Girl from Mars Tim Wheeler, singer, guitarist, songwriter Mark Hamilton and I both got guitars for Christmas when we were 12. We formed a terrible heavy metal band c …
McCoy Tyner obituary Playing a supporting role to a force of nature is a tough call in any form of music – and in the maelstroms of jazz improvisation tougher still. The p …
Led Zeppelin: Stairway to Heaven not partly stolen, court affirms A US appeals court has reinstated a ruling that British rockers Led Zeppelin did not steal part of their song Stairway to Heaven from another band. Th …
Precious stolen work by Persian poet Hafez, now recovered, will be sold A “magnificent” stolen manuscript by the revered 14th-century Persian poet Hafez, which was dramatically discovered earlier this year by a Dutch art s …
Eileen: The Making of George Orwell by Sylvia Topp – review When Eileen O’Shaughnessy married George Orwell in 1936, she was 30 years old, highly educated, and knew her own mind; before the wedding, she told th …
‘History needs to be set alight’: Shabaka Hutchings on the radical power of jazz Shabaka Hutchings has been thinking about the end a lot. “For there to be a change, there needs to be the end of what we want changed,” he says, oracl …
Fiction for older children reviews: from sleuths to woolly mammoths Key stage 2 children are routinely taught about the differences between narrative types – legends, or science fiction, or rags-to-riches stories. One …
Così fan tutte review – has wit and hilarity of 1930s screwball comedy Laura Attridge’s new English Touring Opera production of Così fan tutte relocates Mozart’s great comedy of sexual manipulation from 18th-century Naple …
Good deeds: the mobile library reaching refugees' hearts and minds ‘The Anne Frank came back to us recently from a man living in a tent in Malakasa,” Keira Dignan says. We’re on board the Echo mobile library, a donate …
Baxter Dury webchat – your questions answered on his father, his love of suits and Lou Reed Summary: Alex_Caroll writes: You once said that your family name actually comes from the town Dury by Amiens in France. Do you know when (and why) your family …
Tom Watkins, pop manager behind Pet Shop Boys, Bros and East 17, dies aged 70 Tom Watkins, the music manager who launched the careers of some of the UK’s biggest pop acts, has died aged 70. Friends confirmed that he died on 24 F …
Letter: Alasdair Gray obituary Summary: Alasdair Gray was one of my favourite writers, and featured prominently in the MA dissertation that I wrote in 1987 on experimental novelists. After I …
Body of work: why Billie Eilish is right to stand her ground against shaming Billie Eilish has given the music industry everything it could possibly want. An authentic new voice that appeals to teenagers and their parents. A de …
Alt-pop star US Girls: 'Things happened to me as a kid that broke part of my brain' What is the most hurtful thing anyone’s ever said to you? “I don’t know what’s wrong with me that I make children like this.” “I don’t want you.” “Tha …
Things I Learned from Falling review – desert hike, accident, no hope of rescue Summary: Who can resist triumph over adversity? It is the stuff of many Ted Talks and muscular films and popular books. If the adversity includes wildness and …
Top 10 books about the Windrush generation The Empire Windrush docked at Tilbury in June 1948, but when we talk about the “generation” it is about more than just the passengers on that one boat …
Hurricane Season by Fernanda Melchor review – who killed the village witch? In a house among cane fields lives the Witch of La Matosa. The women of this fictional Mexican village feed her in exchange for occult help. The men r …
Heavy by Dan Franklin review – metal gets serious There was a time when writing about heavy metal was as lowbrow as the genre’s critical reputation. Scorned by “serious” rock critics, lacking in cultu …
Bach Collegium Japan/Suzuki review – tightly plotted drama with real bite Thirty years after he founded his groundbreaking Bach Collegium Japan, Masaaki Suzuki seems to have aged barely a day, yet his performances with them …
‘I never got to thank him’: fans mourn a generation of rappers dying young Summary: To listen to rap music in 2020 is to be in a constant state of mourning. Mac Miller, Lil Peep and Juice WRLD have died of drug overdoses; XXXTentacion …
Bob Marley’s former partner faces loss of flat where he lived in 1970s Summary: A film-maker and actor who dated Bob Marley claims she is being threatened with the imminent repossession of the London flat where the reggae musician …
What’s the secret of happiness? Accepting that life is messy and difficult In an interview marking a decade since her debut album, Ellie Goulding has described her younger self as a mixture of curiosity and confusion: “What’s …
Musical notes: how male pop stars are making love songs all about them Boys in love Laura Snapes, deputy music editor Pop’s leading men once kept their love lives secret to preserve the illusion of availability. But today …
Donald West obituary The criminologist and psychiatrist Donald West, who has died aged 95, made his name with his book Homosexuality, first published in 1955. The time was …
The Beauty and the Terror by Catherine Fletcher review – the dark side of the Italian Renaissance Summary: The historian Catherine Fletcher has a well-deserved reputation as a specialist in 16th-century skulduggery and intrigue. In Our Man in Rome (2012) he …
Apeirogon by Colum McCann review – new perspectives on Israel-Palestine Colum McCann’s odd and ambitious book contains almost 500 pages of fact and fiction about the Israel‑Palestine conflict, combined with various quotati …
Silver Sparrow by Tayari Jones review – a tale of two sisters Following the success of Tayari Jones’s 2019 Women’s prize winner An American Marriage, her 2011 third novel Silver Sparrow is published for the first …
The Impossible Climb by Mark Synnott review – can you 'free solo' El Capitan? Summary: Asked why he wanted to “free solo” El Capitan – “by far the largest and most dramatic rock formation in Yosemite” – Alex Honnold replied: “Some things …
Sitopia by Carolyn Steel review – a utopian vision that begins with food “Civilisation is in crisis,” warned the EAT-Lancet international commission of food scientists last year. “We can no longer feed our population a heal …
Lawrence Upton obituary My friend Lawrence Upton, who has died aged 70, was a leading figure in the British poetry revival of the 1960s and 70s, as a poet, publisher, sound a …
Paramore's Hayley Williams: 'A lot of my depression was misplaced anger' When Hayley Williams was nine, her dad often took her go-karting at Ultimate Fun World in Mississippi. The harder she pressed the accelerator, the mor …
Posadas: Poética del Laberinto review – musical myriads lit up by mythology A 55-minute cycle of pieces for saxophone quartet might not seem a particularly enticing prospect. But in a succession of works over the last 20 years …
Sophie Hardcastle on finding her voice after sexual violence: 'We do scream deep down' When Sophie Hardcastle survived sexual violence at the hands of a friend at the age of 23, the first person she told asked her: “Why didn’t you just s …
Amazon flooded with self-published coronavirus books As the coronavirus spreads around the world, it is not only health professionals and politicians who are being kept busy. Amazon has been flooded with …
Glastonbury defies coronavirus threat to announce lineup with Kendrick Lamar Glastonbury is pressing ahead with preparations for its 50th anniversary year despite coronavirus fears, announcing a wave of more than 90 artists inc …
Top concert promoters and agencies urge suspension of large music events A group of five major concert promoters and music agencies have joined together to recommend a worldwide postponement of large live music events in Ma …
My Chemical Romance drops Australasian tour and Download festival cancelled amid coronavirus fears My Chemical Romance’s tour of Australia, New Zealand and Japan has become the latest casualty of the coronavirus, resulting in the cancellation of the …
Dumama + Kechou: Buffering Juju review – a bewitching musical odyssey Summary: South Africa’s Mushroom Hour Half Hour label has been releasing some of the more ear-tickling sounds from the country’s experimental scene in recent y …
A Race With Love and Death by Richard Williams review – Britain's first great grand prix driver British motor racing was a different kind of deal in the 1930s – both more amateur and more aristocratic than it is today, and certainly more dangerou …
Is My Dark Vanessa the most controversial novel of the year? Author Kate Elizabeth Russell speaks out When, in 2018, Kate Elizabeth Russell’s agent presented publishers with her first novel, My Dark Vanessa, about a sexual relationship between a 15-yea …
The Boomtown Rats: Citizens of Boomtown review – nostalgia and toe-curling currentness The first Boomtown Rats album for 36 years comes trailed by promotional bumf that really does it no favours at all. Pondering the state of the world, …
Code Orange: Underneath review – a thrilling new form of molten metal Despite its reputation as the satanic scourge of curtain-twitching suburbia, metal can be prone to the kind of squabbling you might see at a parish co …
It's my life: the rise of the pop-star scripted documentary “I would like to be excluded from this narrative, one that I have never been asked to be a part of, since 2009,” wrote Taylor Swift of her public feud …
David Lammy: ‘The book I’m ashamed not to have read? Animal Farm’ The book I am currently reading The Memory of Love by Aminatta Forna. It is a sweeping love story set over decades about the mental and physical scars …
Maria McKee: La Vita Nuova review – Show Me Heaven singer's high-drama alt-rock After emerging as a member of cowpunk band Lone Justice in the early 80s, Maria McKee really made her name in the 90s with the kind of impassioned alt …
Where the Wild Ladies Are by Matsuda Aoko review – surreal but relatable short stories “Your hair is the only wild thing you have left – the one precious crop of wildness remaining to you …” a ghost tells her niece, who after being dumpe …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Róisín Murphy, Dixie Chicks, Jarv Is... Róisín Murphy Murphy’s Law If you are undecided as to whether Róisín is single-handedly reviving disco (she is), then this, clocking in at a portly se …
The best recent science fiction and fantasy – review roundup Summary: It’s New Year’s Eve 1982 and Oona Lockhart, who turns 19 tomorrow, faces a dilemma: to remain in New York with her musician boyfriend, or to leave him …
Stranger Things to Uncut Gems: a golden age of electronic soundtracks Summary: It is not hard to see why first-time feature director Nick Rowland looked to Benjamin John Powers for the soundtrack to his film Calm With Horses. It …
Record Store Day postponed until June over coronavirus Record Store Day has been postponed until 20 June due to the coronavirus. The event, set up in 2008 to champion independent record stores, involves th …
'Hammer blow': UK live music sector faces coronavirus disaster The UK live music industry is facing huge losses after tens of events have already been forced to cancel or postpone due to coronavirus. With the Who …
Bag firm adds ‘unique’ appeal by stitching in historical figures’ letters Summary: Love historic documents signed by figures such as Queen Victoria and Charles Dickens? Love luxury handbags? A new company is targeting this novel cros …
Katie Melua: 'My musical ear developed during Georgia's blackouts' In a recording booth at the Georgian Film Studios in Tbilisi, an engineer helping to record the violinist Lisa Batiashvili’s new album curses under hi …
The Voice in My Ear by Frances Leviston review – sly, truthful stories Names in fiction can feel false in their very arbitrariness. “Once you have suffered sufficiently, the idea of making up John and Jane and having them …
Can nature really heal us? Summary: There is a revealing moment in Isabel Hardman’s book where the author, a political journalist who lives with post-traumatic stress disorder, joins a f …
This Too Shall Pass by Julia Samuel review – how to cope with change The only constant is change, said Heraclitus in about 500BC, yet we are rarely prepared for the significant transitions in our lives. Julia Samuel, a …
Steven Appleby: ‘Cross-dressing in secret felt dishonest and stifling' Back in 2002, Steven Appleby inadvertently outed himself in a comic strip about a cross-dressing superhero saving fashion victims from pinstripes and …
The week in classical: Giulio Cesare; Susanna – review Two very different approaches to Handel found their way on to London stages last week; one sure-footed and graceful, the other awkward and graceless, …
English Monsters by James Scudamore review – the horrors of boarding school English Monsters is exactly the right title for this dark, tender, troubling novel. The phrase comes from Shakespeare – “See you, my princes and my no …
One to watch: Brooke Bentham The River Tyne has seen many singer-songwriters bubbling up from its banks. After Sting and Neil Tennant, Richard Dawson and Sam Fender comes 24-year- …
Phyllis Rose: ‘Power still resides in marriage’ Summary: Phyllis Rose is an American author and former academic whose books include Woman of Letters: A Life of Virginia Woolf and The Year of Reading Proust. …
Book clinic: Which thrillers and crime fiction will keep my teenager hooked? Q: My son is 17 and loves thrillers and crime novels. Can you recommend some classics that might appeal to him and some new titles, too? Anonymous mot …
Throbbing Gristle and Psychic TV leader Genesis Breyer P-Orridge dies aged 70 Genesis Breyer P-Orridge, co-founder of avant-garde band Throbbing Gristle and leader of Psychic TV, has died aged 70, according to reports from their …
Home listening: a wealth of new music, plus Alma Mahler in person… Summary: • Mixing different musical styles used to be called crossover. No one much liked the word. The Civitas Ensemble – three top players from the Chicago S …
Low by Jeet Thayil review – a peculiar high Summary: The work of Jeet Thayil has often been marked by a preoccupation with the dangers and appeal of narcotic oblivion. His first novel, Narcopolis (2012), …
Greenery by Tim Dee review – hope’s eternal spring The inspiration for Cormac McCarthy’s bleakly apocalyptic The Road sprang from a surprisingly domestic source. McCarthy found himself, late in life, a …
In the Land of Men by Adrienne Miller – review There is a paradox at the heart of Adrienne Miller’s memoir, In the Land of Men. On the one hand, it’s an account of her becoming the first female lit …
The Nanny State Made Me review – rose-tinted defence of welfare state Summary: This is an odd, personal and polemical book about a big national subject. Stuart Maconie, the writer and broadcaster perhaps best known for his radio …
Dear dairy: one graphic novelist’s fixation with the world of ice-cream vans Summary: Here’s an example of Matthew Dooley’s sense of humour. A while ago, the 35-year-old graphic novelist realised that Mervyn King, the erstwhile governor …
Annalena McAfee: ‘I enjoyed writing this really rather unpleasant character’ Annalena McAfee’s London home, on a quiet cobbled mews not far from Great Ormond Street hospital, seems a fitting place to be speaking about a book fu …
Aria by Nazanine Hozar review – coming of age in divided Tehran Beginning in 1953 and closing in the wake of the Iranian revolution, Nazanine Hozar’s epic novel is named after its heroine. Aria is a defiant, spirit …
Niall Horan: Heartbreak Weather review – 1D’s quiet one comes good Summary: When One Direction were fused together on The X Factor in 2010, Niall Horan – all happy-to-be-there charm and third-place grin – got lost in the mix. …
Genesis P-Orridge: troubling catalyst who loathed rock yet changed it for ever For someone who occasionally purported to hate rock music – it was, a homemade T-shirt s/he was fond of wearing in the 1970s proclaimed, “for arselick …
Genesis P-Orridge obituary “I am at war with the status quo of society and I am at war with those in control and power,” said Genesis P-Orridge in 1989. “I’m at war with hypocri …
The Marriage of Figaro review – superb singing in hilarious staging Summary: Sometimes simple solutions really do work best. Joe Hill-Gibbins’ new production of The Marriage of Figaro for English National Opera stages Mozart an …
CocoRosie: Put the Shine On review: a return to core idiosyncrasies It’s 17 years since Bianca and Sierra Casady materialised like a fever dream of New York’s 00s freak-folk scene, a new, weird American incarnation of …
Letter: Andy Gill obituary Andy Gill and Gang of Four weren’t just students in Leeds, they were part of the cultural infrastructure of the city. They were part of the musical sc …
A dystopian reading list: books to enjoy while in quarantine A good reading list for self-isolation requires several categories. You should read some of the brilliant pandemic novels that everyone is talking abo …
'Dead Sea Scrolls fragments' at Museum of the Bible are all fakes, study says Summary: When Steve Green paid millions of dollars from his family fortune for 16 fragments of the ancient Dead Sea Scrolls, it seemed the perfect addition to …
Mike Skinner: 'It's not cool to be 40 in a nightclub, getting off your face. But it happens' ‘This is where I go on like Morrissey and say something terrible,” says Mike Skinner. “That’s what ageing musicians are supposed to do, isn’t it? They …
#Notmymermaid: the Disney row is ridiculous – who knows what mermaids look like? Summary: In July, 2019, Disney announced that R&B singer and actor Halle Bailey would play Ariel in the live action remake of their hugely successful 1989 film …
Jon Hopkins review – recital turns rave as fans embrace one last gig Sunday evening and the atmosphere in Brighton Dome feels curiously subdued. Perhaps it has something to do with the fact that you can’t escape current …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Lousie Erdrich’s Last Report On The Miracles At Li …
Delivery by skateboard? Coronavirus sees indie booksellers get inventive The booksellers at Burley Fisher Books in Haggerston are expecting their bikes to get a lot of use over the coming weeks. On Friday, they encouraged a …
LSO/Pappano review - intense and unsparing emotional directness At the end of his concert with the London Symphony Orchestra, Antonio Pappano made a short speech, thanking the audience for attending and giving thei …
Russians Among Us by Gordon Corera review – spies in plain sight Summary: In June 2010, Vladimir Putin’s spies broke into the Guardian’s Moscow office. This was a regular thing. Whenever I wrote a story that displeased the K …
Sorry, the band making ennui sexy Most bands form over pints, broken hearts and aspirations of superstardom. Few start with mild bullying. But Asha Lorenz, the frontwoman of London ban …
Poetry book of the month: Loss by David Harsent – review This is a long watch of a poem, a tormented vigil. You want to ask, “Who’s there?” – a question you might, like the guard in Hamlet’s opening scene, c …
The last dance: clubbing in the coronavirus crisis Bang Face, a dance music festival held at Southport holiday park Pontins, is known for a particularly hell-for-leather approach to jackhammering dance …
Drake scores most US chart hits ever Summary: Canadian rapper Drake now has more US chart hits than any other artist in history, scoring his 208th Billboard Hot 100 entry this week. The rapper bro …
From Aphex Twin to Al Green: the most soothing songs to self-isolate with Summary: Alexis Petridis, chief rock and pop critic Deniece Williams – Free From 1976, soul music so pillowy and cosseting, it makes Minnie Ripperton’s Loving …
Fiona Apple: six reasons she is the perfect artist for a time of crisis It’s been eight years since Fiona Apple last graced the world with a studio album, but an illuminating profile in the latest issue of the New Yorker, …
'Sing across rooftops': Bono writes coronavirus song dedicated to Italy U2 frontman Bono has performed his first new music since 2017 with a song inspired by Italians quarantined during the coronavirus outbreak. He posted …
Greenwood by Michael Christie review – an arresting eco-parable The Canadian writer Michael Christie is a former professional skateboarder whose debut novel, If I Fall, If I Die, was a semi-autobiographical story o …
Katy Perry wins appeal in $2.8m plagiarism case Summary: Katy Perry has won an appeal in a copyright case involving damages of $2.8m (£2.3m). In July 2014, Perry was accused of plagiarising the song Joyful N …
'I feel fine': George RR Martin reassures fans from self-isolation It is the pandemic news we have all been needing: George RR Martin is using his hours of confinement to work on his long-awaited Game of Thrones novel …
Top 10 books about boarding school Boarding school stories for children make up an entire genre, and have their lifelong devotees – but as in, say, the work of PG Wodehouse, the environ …
Glastonbury: tell us how you feel about the festival's cancellation News that the Glastonbury festival 2020 has been cancelled to prevent the spread of coronavirus will have come as a shock to many. The festival’s 50th …
Glastonbury 2020: festival cancelled due to coronavirus outbreak The Glastonbury festival, which was due to celebrate its 50th anniversary year in 2020 with headliners including Taylor Swift, Paul McCartney and Kend …
Tackle that to-be-read pile: the books to try if you're self-isolating Summary: If you are the type of person who is tormented by the thought of all the books out there still waiting to be read, you are likely, for the worst of re …
Daryl Davis: the black musician who converts Ku Klux Klan members Daryl Davis is a musician – a pianist to be exact. He has jammed with the likes of Chuck Berry, Jerry Lee Lewis, BB King and even Bill Clinton. Loyal …
A History of Solitude by David Vincent; A Biography of Loneliness by Fay Bound Alberti – review Solitude is not the same as loneliness. Lonely people feel the need for company, while solitary types seek to escape it. The neatest definition of lon …
Are these widespread closures across Europe really 'draconian' measures? This week it was reported that several countries’ closures of pubs and restaurants, along with other “social distancing” measures intended to slow the …
Inferno by Catherine Cho review – a brilliantly frightening memoir “Through my dread and my fear, I saw the beauty in them, the patterns in the universe. I could tell it was dangerous, this raw energy, this coursing f …
'Instagram, how we feeling!' Can livestreaming replace cancelled gigs? “Instagram! How are we feeling tonight?” shouts rising Newcastle pop star L Devine. The crowd goes wild. She throws her arms wide. Then she pauses the …
How Italian booklovers are coping in the coronavirus lockdown Snow falls on the rooftops in eerie silence. Just days ago this mountainous countryside at the border with Austria was packed with tourists. Now it is …
Musicians ask Spotify to triple payments to cover lost concert revenue Musicians are calling on Spotify to triple its royalty rates following the coronavirus pandemic. Due to government guidance, many venues have closed a …
Cured by Jeffrey Rediger review – stories of spontaneous healing Summary: The placebo effect is a wonderful thing, and still highly mysterious. A person who believes they have been given effective treatment for pain or disea …
J Balvin: Colores review – with this much style, who needs substance? There are few hard and fast laws in the world of rock and pop music, but as a general rule of thumb, you can tell an album is considered a big deal if …
David Bowie's 50 greatest songs – ranked! 50. Let Me Sleep Beside You (1967) A rejected single finally released on a 1970 cash-in compilation, Bowie’s first collaboration with the producer Ton …
Maria Tumarkin on winning the 2020 Windham Campbell: 'It feels like a complicated gift' Maria Tumarkin learned she was one of eight writers around the world to win the world’s richest literary prize, the US$165,000-per head Yale-administe …
The Discomfort of Evening by Marieke Lucas Rijneveld review – a family’s grief Summary: On a cold winter day in the rural Netherlands, a boy goes ice skating on the local pond. His sister Jas, who had asked to come along, is resentful at …
'I'm trying to keep the panic down' – the coronavirus impact on music There isn’t a single part of the music industry that won’t be affected by the coronavirus outbreak. The most obvious are the high profile festival can …
Meredith Monk: Memory Game review – passing her musical baton to the next generation Meredith Monk might be one of America’s most fascinating composers, but the additional roles that she has created for herself – that of singer, dancer …
Duffy debuts first new music since rape ordeal revelation Duffy, the pop star who recently said she retreated from public life due to a kidnap and rape ordeal, has debuted her first new music since the announ …
'I’m no snowflake': Anne Glenconner on Margaret, marriage and Meghan Markle Since it came out five months ago, a debut work by an 87-year-old has become a publishing phenomenon. Lady in Waiting: My Extraordinary Life in the Sh …
Morrissey: I Am Not a Dog on a Chain review – old man yells at cloud Summary: Morrissey’s official channels have recently been stressing the 60-year-old’s virility, citing reviews from his US tour that praise his “ageless” voice …
Låpsley: Through Water review – intensely poetic and powerful On her 2016 debut, Liverpudlian electronic pop singer Låpsley worked with a brains trust of songwriters and producers to try her hand at chart anthems …
Inua Ellams: ‘The books I wish I’d written? Marvel’s Civil War series’ The book I am currently reading The Shadow King by Maaza Mengiste. Maaza and I bonded over jollof rice in a canteen at the Aké festival in Nigeria a f …
Young T & Bugsey: Plead the 5th review – champagne-soaked retro rap London may no longer be the centre of UK hip-hop, but many regional rap scenes are only just minting their first mainstream stars. Thanks to two Top 2 …
Musicians head online as Covid-19 puts live shows on pause “It’s a way to bring money in,” says the Metronomy bassist, Olugbenga Adelekan, who is preparing to give an online lesson from his home studio. “It’s …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Bow Anderson, The Killers, Yaeji Bow Anderson Sweater Twenty-six years after Weezer’s Undone (The Sweater Song), the humble pullover is – finally! – back in the pop milieu. Here, newc …
The best recent crime novels – review roundup American Stephanie Wrobel’s first novel, The Recovery of Rose Gold (Michael Joseph, £14.99), begins after the point where most Munchausen’s syndrome n …
Breathe in, now breathe out: how musicians are embracing guided meditations Take a deep breath and come to a comfortable seated position: we could all do with some spiritual healing right now, but especially the music industry …
'This is a scary time': coronavirus emergency fund set up for authors A £330,000 emergency fund for authors is being launched to support those facing “unmanageable” losses from the cancellation of events, book tours and …
Coronavirus leaves roadies and events crew devastated: 'It's the first industry to stop dead' During the 45 minutes we’re on the phone, Steve “Pineapple” Alberts – a behind-the-scenes mainstay of Australian live music – misses seven calls. Albe …
Lockdown: Simon Armitage writes poem about coronavirus outbreak Simon Armitage has written a poem to address the coronavirus and a lockdown that is slowly being implemented across the UK, saying that the art form c …
My tip for self-isolation? It’s best not to stockpile books Summary: I’m the sort of person who stays in the house for fun. Really. When people ask what I’m doing, expecting that the life of an author is a socially busy …
Kenny Rogers, country music star, dies aged 81 Kenny Rogers, the American country music star with hits popular across the world, has died of natural causes at the age of 81 at his home in Sandy Spr …
The Bass Rock by Evie Wyld review – a fearless vision of toxic masculinity In her award-winning first two novels, 2009’s After the Fire, A Still Small Voice and 2013’s All the Birds Singing, Anglo-Australian author Evie Wyld …
Poetry can be the bridge that connects us during these difficult times In the days after the arrival of Covid-19 in the UK, I watched in horror as government policy failed to mobilise the public and enact drastic social d …
Feeling overwhelmed? How art can help in an emergency by Olivia Laing Long before the arrival of Covid-19, the speed and contents of the news had made me feel almost overwhelmed with fear. Faced with a flood of images th …
Classical music: let the Berlin Phil come to you • As home entertainment becomes inevitably more central to our lives, the quest will surely be to capture the spirit of the authentic live experience. …
Home listening: in stormy times, Schubert is balm for the soul • “There’s no love song finer/ But how strange the change/ From major to minor”, as Cole Porter observed in his Great American Songbook classic Ev’ry …
Jessie Reyez: Before Love Came to Kill Us review – an outrageously fine debut As the pop landscape becomes progressively bolder and more crowded, it becomes more difficult for any new artist to make an impact. The bandwidth is s …
Rebecca Solnit: 'I came to the idea of hope as an activist and writer of history' Rebecca Solnit is one of America’s leading writers on art, culture and politics. She’s been called “the voice of the resistance” by the New York Times …
Kenny Rogers: the genre gambler who always came up trumps Seven years ago, Kenny Rogers was interviewed by the Guardian. He was about to play Glastonbury, a turn of events by which he seemed utterly perplexed …
Kenny Barron, Dave Holland, Johnathan Blake: Without Deception review – an outstanding trio In jazz, there are pianists with bass and drums accompaniment and there are piano trios. They look the same on stage, but there is a world of differen …
Book clinic: are there any novels about the climate crisis? Q: Can you recommend some climate crisis fiction? The nonfiction is too depressing and fiction often helps the heart cope with the world Peggy Duesenb …
Jami Attenberg: ‘We tend to blame our parents for too long’ Summary: Jami Attenberg is an American novelist, short story writer and essayist. Her third novel, The Middlesteins, was a New York Times bestseller and she ha …
Rake’s Progress: My Political Midlife Crisis by Rachel Johnson review – all the fun of a Johnsonian farce As Rachel Johnson’s mother used to say, there is no such thing as a wasted experience: however bad things get, there is something to be learned from i …
Maggie O’Farrell: ‘Having to bury a child must be unlike anything else’ When the novelist Maggie O’Farrell was 16, she was invited to a fancy-dress party and knew at once who to be. She put on a black shirt, with a ruffled …
Roger and Brian Eno: Mixing Colours review – an intimate conversation The Eno brothers have collaborated before, most recently on 2019’s revamp of the celebrated 1983 Apollo: Atmospheres & Soundtracks documentary score ( …
The Discomfort of Evening by Marieke Lucas Rijneveld – review Discomfort is putting it mildly. Marieke Lucas Rijneveld’s debut novel, which has been longlisted for the International Booker prize, goes all the way …
The Brighton jihadists: bullied brothers who went into battle Summary: Much has been written about Britons who fought in Syria, but little truly explains who these characters were, what made them tick. Or what actually ha …
Låpsley: Through Water review – bedroom auteur’s potent follow-up Following the release of her precocious debut album, 2016’s Long Way Home, bedroom auteur Holly Låpsley Fletcher took time away from music to take sto …
Dominicana by Angie Cruz review – disenfranchised in the USA Summary: From birth, Ana Canción has been told that her green eyes are “a winning lottery ticket”. She is a country girl with modest horizons but her mother – …
In brief: Dead Famous; The Voice in My Ear; Appeasing Hitler – review Dead Famous Greg Jenner Weidenfeld, £18.99, pp389 In this engaging and well-researched book, historian Greg Jenner looks at everyone from Lord Byron t …
J Balvin: Colores review – a riot of hooks and ideas Since Colombian reggaeton sensation J Balvin’s global breakthrough with 2017 banger Mi Gente, his stock has risen thanks in part to a slew of well-cho …
Mali music star Rokia Traoré on hunger strike after  'kidnapping' arrest There are growing concerns for the health of Rokia Traoré, the internationally celebrated Malian singer, who has been on hunger strike at the Fleury-M …
Waterstones closes stores in U-turn over staff's Covid-19 fears Summary: Waterstones has said it will close its 280 UK branches from Monday, hours after its chief executive said the bookstore chain was “no different to a su …
Let's move to Mars: the best books about our future in space It’s no longer a question of whether we’re going to Mars, but when. By the time we reach a second planet – probably in the 2030s – we’ll probably have …
Liberation Through Hearing: Rap, Rave and the Rise of XL – review The music business is full of kneejerk hyperbole, but XL Recordings, the independent London label run by Richard Russell, remains the most extraordina …
A Thousand Moons by Sebastian Barry review – a compelling tale of identity and revenge Summary: At a time when questions of identity are fraught and thorny, there’s something daring in the set-up of Sebastian Barry’s A Thousand Moons. Continuing …
Kraftwerk: where to start in their back catalogue While many of us worldwide are unable to experience live music during the coronavirus crisis, or even socialise as normal, we can still use streaming …
Keeper by Jessica Moor review – atmospheric, timely The old adage about writing what you know has fallen out of fashion as advice for new writers, but it’s served Jessica Moor well in her first novel, K …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Charles Portis’s True Grit is “turning out to be a …
Rick Astley: how we made Never Gonna Give You Up Rick Astley, singer I was the drummer in FBI, a jangly guitar band in Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire. After I started writing a few tunes, I became the …
Malcolm Chase obituary The social historian Malcolm Chase, who has died aged 63 after suffering from a brain tumour, explored the world of working-class people in 19th-centu …
Lyrical lockdown: rappers respond to coronavirus As cultural institutions and the arts sector struggle to adjust to their new roles during the coronavirus outbreak, one strand is proving particularly …
Close libraries now, plead library chiefs as 'terrified' London staff walk out Librarians in south London staged a walkout on Friday over fears for their health during the coronavirus pandemic as leaders of the sector called for …
Valeria Luiselli wins £30,000 Rathbones Folio prize for third novel Summary: Valeria Luiselli’s “singular, teeming, extraordinary” novel Lost Children Archive has won the £30,000 Rathbones Folio prize. The Mexican-born novelist …
No Modernism Without Lesbians by Diana Souhami – review As Diana Souhami sees it, lesbianism is much more than a sexual preference: it extends into an artistic vocation, an enraptured emotional cult and a p …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup Rules for Perfect Murders Peter Swanson Faber, £12.99, pp288 Malcolm Kershaw runs a bookstore in Boston specialising in mystery fiction. He is contact …
Asterix creator Albert Uderzo dies at 92 Asterix illustrator Albert Uderzo has died at the age of 92, his family has announced. The French comic book artist, who created the beloved Asterix c …
Kim Kardashian West accuses Taylor Swift of lying over leaked tape One of celebrity’s longest-running but assumed dormant feuds has once again reared its head. Kim Kardashian West has accused Taylor Swift of lying aft …
Rihanna: where to start in her back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Rated R (2009) By 2009, the idea of the “rebel album” – a record by a (typically female) pop star that aims for darker, more m …
Make Room! Make Room! versus Soylent Green: can film trump book? I’ve just taken advantage of my time in isolation to watch Richard Fleischer’s 1973 sci-fi classic Soylent Green. My firm conclusion is that it is (ev …
Soothing songs for self-isolation: readers' picks Last week, we published a 60-song playlist of soothing songs to reduce the stresses of self-isolation and the coronavirus outbreak. We asked you for y …
Strike a pose! My night at a vogue ball with Malcolm McLaren It was late September 1988: George Bush was up against Michael Dukakis in the first of their two TV debates. The presidential campaign was hotting up …
Julie Felix obituary In 1966, at the height of the folk music boom in Britain, David Frost’s satirical television show The Frost Report featured a young American folk sing …
Henry Gray obituary Summary: In the electrifying blues scene of 1950s Chicago there were two men who rose above all others. On one side stood the stylish Muddy Waters; on the othe …
Illustrator Albert Uderzo drew me in to Asterix's world with deftness and care Asterix has been part of our lives for nearly 60 years, and of mine for nearly 50. I still remember my immediate assent to René Goscinny and Albert Ud …
Asterix: a world of joyful innocence born in the aftermath of war As a child, devouring every Asterix book I could lay my hands on, I failed to notice what now, with the sombre perspective of adulthood, I can recogni …
Box Hill by Adam Mars-Jones review – a sparky yet sad vision of gay subculture Adam Mars-Jones’s fiction is nothing if not intermittent. His early stories in Lantern Lecture (1981), including one where the Queen contracts rabies, …
Classical musicians plead for support as cancelled concerts blight income It’s not called the gig economy by accident. Musicians are among those hardest hit by the cultural shutdown, and with the government currently offerin …
Jackson Browne tests positive for coronavirus Summary: Jackson Browne has tested positive for coronavirus. The 71-year-old musician told Rolling Stone that he had mild symptoms including “a small cough and …
Top 10 novels and stories about shame I was an adolescent when I first came across the letters of St Paul. Though I had been raised Greek Orthodox, at 13 I had joined an evangelical church …
The Fall: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with Hex Enduction Hour (1982) ‘There’s always some cunt who wants to ask me about a masterpiece I made in 1982,” frothed Mark E Sm …
Conclusions by John Boorman review – film gossip and nostalgia Summary: “I am a man I never had time to get to know,” announces the film-maker John Boorman, director of Point Blank (1967) and Deliverance (1972), halfway th …
Adele, Keith Flint, Gil Scott-Heron and me: Richard Russell, the XL records Midas From the outside, Richard Russell’s studio looks like any other house in Notting Hill. But inside, there’s a plethora of vintage synthesisers and some …
Don't panic: the best books to help us survive a crisis Summary: The coronavirus has put life on hold. In this time of fractured human contact and fear of the unknown, we need to read authors who will embolden us fo …
Book sales surge as self-isolating readers stock up on ‘bucket list’ novels Book sales have leapt across the country as readers find they have extra time on their hands, with bookshops reporting a significant increase in sales …
The Chats: the making of Australia’s favourite ratbags The Chats might have the least aspirational origin story in music: they began out messing around together in a friend’s “bong shed” (where their chose …
Julie Felix: 10 of her greatest performances As a Californian teenager, Julie Felix – who has died aged 81 – never imagined herself becoming a folk singer, but her guitar became a handy tool for …
Kanye West likens backlash over support for Trump to racial profiling Kanye West has reaffirmed his support for Donald Trump, whom he has previously called “his brother”, in a new interview with the Wall Street Journal. …
I used to live for travel – in fact, I just wrote the book on it. But there’s no running away now I’ve just published a novel called Sweetness and Light, a kind of thriller set in the seedy underbelly of expat hangouts on the international tourist …
Hamnet by Maggie O'Farrell review – immersive Shakespearean drama In Hamnet, Maggie O’Farrell has placed the bit players of the Shakespeare story centre stage, while the dramatist himself is never even named. This is …
Phil Ochs: the doomed folk singer who woke up from the American dream As a kid in the 1950s, Phil Ochs cut class and spent afternoons at the local movie house. The Searchers and Rebel Without a Cause were two of his favo …
As If by Chance by David Lan review – a glowing memoir Always, on entering the endlessly reconfigured auditoria of the Young Vic theatre, on London’s South Bank, the shiver of excitement at not knowing whe …
From splendid to stressful: a short history of isolation “Isolation is the sum-total of wretchedness to man,” wrote the historian Thomas Carlyle in 1843, which might sound dispiriting today. But he did not m …
Malian musician Rokia Traoré freed from French prison pending transfer to Belgium Malian musician Rokia Traoré has been released from a French prison, after being detained since 10 March for the alleged kidnap of her daughter in a c …
Rapper Bugzy Malone involved in serious motorbike accident The Manchester rapper Bugzy Malone, AKA Aaron Davis, has been seriously injured after his motorbike hit a car on the streets of Bury. CCTV footage sho …
Alice Coltrane: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Journey in Satchidananda (1971) The first thing to understand about composer and musician Alice Coltrane’s catalogue is that t …
Download and Isle of Wight festivals cancelled due to coronavirus Isle of Wight and Download festivals, two of the first major events in the UK’s summer music calendar, have cancelled their 2020 events due to Covid-1 …
'The perfect time to start': how book clubs are enduring and flourishing during Covid-19 My book club was the first to concede defeat. Before my gym, hair salon and therapist accepted that there could be no more business as usual as the co …
La Passione review – Grisey's masterpiece endures Finding contemporary works to programme alongside Gérard Grisey’s Quatre Chants pour Franchir le Seuil (Four Songs for Crossing the Threshold) is an a …
Finally working on that novel as you self-isolate? You're not alone If you’re one of those people who always said they would write a novel if only they had the time: this is your moment. As more budding writers self-is …
Michael Gerard obituary My father, Michael Gerard, who has died aged 73, was a teacher with a great passion for music. He was proud to have founded the Greenshoots Ceilidh Or …
Mark Manson: We do awful things in relationships because we're scared or hurt I want to talk to Mark Manson about intimacy, a recurring theme throughout the blogger-turned-author’s new Audible Original audiobook, Love Is Not Eno …
The Strokes on their wilderness years: 'There was conflict and fear and we got through it' Julian Casablancas and Albert Hammond Jr are sitting at opposite ends of an overstuffed sofa in an upmarket London hotel, some weeks before the corona …
Bob Dylan releases first original song in eight years, 17-minute track about JFK Bob Dylan has released his first original music in eight years, a 17-minute long song about the JFK assassination. A ballad set to piano, strings and …
The Treatment by Michael Nath review – London's wild side When peering through the mists of time and reflecting on his training as a novice journalist, Carl Hyatt, narrator of The Treatment, wonders “was a st …
Five of the best cultural books to catch up on Summary: Stranger Than Kindness by Nick Cave (Canongate) As if being able to make a record while grieving wasn’t remarkable enough, Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds’ …
Dua Lipa: Future Nostalgia review – a true pop visionary Dua Lipa could have taken an easy path to sustaining her status as Britain’s most successful female pop star on album number two. A few Ed Sheeran co- …
The Chats: High Risk Behaviour review – dorkish fun from Aussie pub poets Summary: After some colourful YouTube videos that went viral and two acclaimed EPs, Dave Grohl/Iggy Pop-favoured Aussies the Chats’ “shed rock” debut blazes ou …
Abbey Road zebra crossing repainted in coronavirus lockdown The iconic Abbey Road zebra crossing made famous by the 1969 Beatles album of the same name has been repainted while the streets of London are empty b …
Elizabeth Gilbert: ‘Don’t we all wish we’d written Wolf Hall?’ The book I am currently reading I’ve just finished Boy Swallows Universe by Trent Dalton. It’s a novel about two resourceful and sensitive young broth …
Skepta, Chip and Young Adz: Insomnia review – dark, funny and perfectly timed Summary: This surprise album from three leading UK MCs is a perfectly timed gift. Mercury prize-winning Skepta, Tottenham MC Chip – both longstanding grime vet …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Fenne Lily, Waxahatchee, Perfume Genius Fenne Lily Hypochondriac “I’m freaking out / Now I’m sick and waiting for a moment to stop and not feel so much,” sings Bristol’s Fenne Lily in this p …
Think Again by Jan Morris review – diary of a remarkable writer At getting on for 94, Jan Morris is realistic that this will probably be her last book. For the past 70 years she has roamed far and wide: as a journa …
Miraa May: 'Women in music are sexualised so much. I find it disrespectful' Miraa May’s pop preaches unshakeable self-love (“Tell ’em I don’t bow down to nobody,” goes one hook). But curled up on her sofa, bare-faced and dress …
Bob Dylan: Murder Most Foul review – a dark, dense ballad for the end times As with pretty much anything Bob Dylan does these days, you can only speculate at his reasons for unexpectedly releasing a 17-minute song, ostensibly …
Why playlists are getting me through anxious times For many of a certain age, their teenage years were largely spent in their bedrooms – “a world where I can go and tell my secrets to”, as the Beach Bo …
All Points East, Parklife and Lovebox festivals cancel due to coronavirus The music festival season continues to collapse amid the coronavirus crisis, with Manchester’s Parklife as well as London’s All Points East and Lovebo …
Free opera and classical for watching at home: our critics' top picks Igor Levit’s Twitter recitals How often has one of the world’s great pianists played live for you at home? Igor Levit is doing it every day for all of …
Albert Camus novel The Plague leads surge of pestilence fiction A plague is spreading. People are dying. Everyone is ordered to quarantine at home as the local doctor works around the clock to save victims. There a …
Readers, it is time to embrace each other ... online Oh it’s a time, isn’t it? But instead of queueing up to buy three hundred rolls of toilet paper and 70 bottles of water, lots of us are trying to keep …
Bina by Anakana Schofield review – 'for every woman who has had enough' When the high priestess of commodified minimalism, Marie Kondo, encouraged her followers to gut their book collections and keep only the handful of vo …
Children’s books roundup – the best new picture books and novels With normal routines disrupted and anxiety levels high, brilliant children’s books may offer a handle on difficult times, or at least a charmed bubble …
Howard Jacobson: 'I am a social distancer by instinct' “It was about the beginning of September, 1664, that I, among the rest of my neighbours, heard in ordinary discourse, that the plague was returned aga …
From Virginia Woolf to Stephen Hawking: the best books about time As the clocks go forward, reminding us once more of time’s strange slipperiness, I find myself returning to Ted Hughes. The Poems, selected by Simon A …
Book clinic: Can you recommend a replacement for Rumpole of the Bailey? Q: I’m a huge fan of John Mortimer and have yet to find a replacement for Rumpole. Any suggestions? A: Harriet Tyce is a former criminal barrister and …
Defiant British Museum appoints Mary Beard as trustee Renowned classicist Mary Beard has been chosen as a trustee of the British Museum, despite Downing Street blocking her nomination last year because of …
Remaking One Nation: The Future of Conservatism by Nick Timothy – review What Dominic Cummings, the teacosy-wearing consigliere of Boris Johnson, is to the current regime at No 10, Nick Timothy was to Theresa May. He even h …
Exploding the myths behind K-pop As students wait outside an exam room in Seoul’s affluent Gangnam district, the air is tense. A girl in a school uniform rocks a guitar back and forth …
Sorry: 925 review – full of disruptive ideas Summary: Part of the London scene loosely headquartered at Brixton’s Windmill pub (from Fat White Family to Goat Girl and beyond), Sorry have undergone a radic …
My Dark Vanessa by Kate Elizabeth Russell review – grooming as a teen love story Summary: When #MeToo broke, it wasn’t just about high-profile cases of abuse – it felt like a new light being shone on all past interactions, allowing us to se …
Influential composer Krzysztof Penderecki dies aged 86 Leading composer and conductor Krzysztof Penderecki has died at the age of 86 after a long illness, his family announced this morning. The Polish-born …
Mahler versus Slowthai! - what happened when our pop and classical critics traded jobs? Fiona Maddocks Went to the NME awards at Brixton Academy Well, I had my experience of being you, Kitty. It was quite hard. The odd thing was that, onc …
Krzysztof Penderecki obituary The Polish composer and conductor Krzysztof Penderecki, who has died aged 86, was an outstanding representative of musical modernism’s success in the …
In brief: The Bass Rock; Radical Acts of Love; Letters of Note: Mothers – review The Bass Rock Evie Wyld Jonathan Cape, £16.99, pp368 It’s the early 18th century and Sarah is accused by villagers of being a witch after crops fail a …
Letter: Genesis P-Orridge obituary In the spring of 1973 I was a student organiser of the Mayfly festival planned for 1 May in Oxford. I invited Genesis P-Orridge (obituary, 16 March) t …
Enigmatic, devotional, restless … a guide to Krzysztof Penderecki's music When I unearthed a score of Krzysztof Penderecki’s Symphony No 1 in my local library during my early teens, my idea of what music could be changed for …
Competition launched to find real-life Dickens characters A charity founded by Charles Dickens has launched a competition to find real modern-day characters who could have provided the basis for one of the au …
Here's my mum with the news! Radio DJs on the switch to home-broadcasting Summary: It’s 8.15am and Radio 1 breakfast DJ Greg James is playing Stay by Alessia Cara. It’s appropriately infectious, bright and upbeat – despite the fact t …
Kids at home? The books you should read to keep everyone entertained Of course, good parents would have already compiled a reading list ready for the day when they are holed up for an unspecified number of weeks with th …
Bohemian tragedy: Leonard Cohen and the curse of Hydra I’ve been noticing of late how often the woman you see in the photograph, with her head on Leonard Cohen’s shoulder is captioned as “Marianne”. In fac …
Jennifer Bate obituary Summary: The organist Jennifer Bate, who has died aged 75 from cancer, was a leading exponent of the music of Olivier Messiaen. They met in 1975, when the comp …
Poem of the week:  Letter to My Daughter by William Palmer Letter to My Daughter The hare limped trembling through the frozen grass… These words of Keats – the animal moving through the vowels, the consonants …
Prize shares £10,000 between publishers amid coronavirus damage Small press Fitzcarraldo Editions, which published the Nobel laureates Svetlana Alexievich and Olga Tokarczuk before they were recognised by the Swedi …
Bob Andy obituary The Jamaican singer-songwriter Bob Andy, who has died of cancer aged 75, enjoyed a long and fruitful career. Best known in Britain for the chart succe …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start with some sunny optimism from Cellamar …
Aldeburgh festival 2020 cancelled due to coronavirus The Aldeburgh festival is the latest cultural casualty of the coronavirus pandemic. The classical music event founded in 1948 by Benjamin Britten will …
The Beautiful South: how we made Rotterdam (Or Anywhere) Paul Heaton, co-writer I wrote the lyrics to Rotterdam (Or Anywhere) sitting in a bar on the north end of Lijnbaan, Rotterdam’s main shopping street. …
Internet Archive accused of using Covid-19 as 'an excuse for piracy' The Internet Archive has launched a “National Emergency Library”, making 1.4m books available free online – but has been accused of “hitting authors w …
Coronavirus is a tragedy – but it could be the wake-up call we need For some time this pandemic will focus almost all of our attention. It is a tragedy that will play out differently in different parts of the world; th …
Indian Sun: The Life and Music of Ravi Shankar by Oliver Craske – review Summary: On the eve of what would have been his 100th birthday (he died at 92), Ravi Shankar remains one of the most famous and influential Indians of modern t …
Sleater-Kinney: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with All Hands on the Bad One (Kill Rock Stars, 2000) As any band that comes out of a DIY scene knows, no matter how pure your inte …
Michael Rosen 'very poorly but stable' after night in intensive care Michael Rosen’s family has said that the poet, broadcaster and author, who is suffering from suspected coronavirus, is “very poorly at the moment” but …
Waxahatchee: 'Getting sober, you’re facing this stuff shoved deep down' Katie Crutchfield pulls up in her dad’s rugged Jeep outside my hotel in a suburb of Birmingham, Alabama. She grins when I voice my surprise at her rid …
The month's best mixes: industrial dancehall, digital anxiety and 'the Techno Columbo' RA 718: Low Jack Low Jack’s Resident Advisor mix hits like a sack of bricks. Born in Honduras and based in Paris, the producer/DJ imbues his work with …
Reading group: what book should we read to cheer us up in April? Summary: There are plenty of things we want to avoid spreading at the moment – but at least we can share a little joy. So for this month’s reading group, tell …
Awe, wonder and the overview effect: how feeling small gives us much-needed perspective Surely the best witnesses to the fact that the key to awe and wonder is feeling small are astronauts. Like Captain Jim Lovell, who, when on board the …
Sway by Pragya Agarwal review – how we are all unconsciously biased In experiments, people perceive an approaching spider to be moving much faster than it really is, and faster than a ping-pong ball or other neutral ob …
You People by Nikita Lalwani review – the limits of compassion Nikita Lalwani’s 2007 debut Gifted, the story of a maths prodigy raised by her Hindu parents in Cardiff and groomed for Oxford, won the Desmond Elliot …
Chuck D says Flavor Flav still in Public Enemy, and split was a hoax Chuck D has said that Flavor Flav is still a member of Public Enemy, and his recent firing from the group was a satirical hoax. On 1 March, Chuck D sa …
Top 10 Irish gothic novels In his 1919 paper on the uncanny, Freud reckoned “the frightening element is something that has been repressed and now returns”. As a nation whose tra …
Wallace Roney, US jazz trumpeter, dies aged 59 from coronavirus Wallace Roney, a Grammy-winning jazz trumpeter celebrated for his interpretations of Miles Davis, has died aged 59 after contracting Covid-19. He died …
Ravi Shankar: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Raga Eternally pictured sitting cross-legged and barefoot, clutching his enormous sitar, wreathed in incense smoke with his he …
My Meteorite by Harry Dodge review – reflections on touch and vulnerability What do we expose ourselves to when we touch another person? How vulnerable are we when we make our bodies porous or penetrable to others? When he wro …
‘I have no mind’s eye’: what is it like being an author with aphantasia? ‘Picture this,” someone says. “A juicy green apple. Can you see it?” Of course I can’t see it. My head is filled with all things apple; the central co …
A-listers lend talents to bedtime story initiative during lockdown As culture adapts to the limitations imposed by the Covid-19 outbreak there has been myriad new material online, from viral pop parody videos and impr …
Taylor Swift donates to Nashville record store hit by coronavirus Taylor Swift has made a financial contribution to a record store in her home city of Nashville that was in danger of going out of business because of …
Discovery of letters shines light on Thomas Hardy's second marriage Touching newly discovered letters written by Thomas Hardy’s second wife reveal her joy at their union and, later, her sadness at life without the grea …
Things Fall Apart singer Cristina reportedly dies from coronavirus The new-wave pop singer Cristina has reportedly died at age 61 after being diagnosed with coronavirus. The singer, whose full name was Cristina Monet- …
Ellis Marsalis, jazz pianist and father to Wynton and Branford, dies aged 85 Ellis Marsalis, the jazz pianist who fathered two of America’s most celebrated jazz performers in Wynton and Branford Marsalis, has died aged 85. He i …
Dolly Parton pledges $1m to coronavirus vaccine research Dolly Parton has donated $1m (£800,000) to research into a coronavirus vaccine, as she begins a new storytelling series for children in lockdown. The …
The Caravan by Thomas Hegghammer review – Abdallah Azzam and the rise of global jihad In November 1989, a middle-aged Palestinian Islamist ideologue, scholar and organiser called Abdallah Azzam was killed when a bomb exploded under his …
International Booker prize shortlist led by 28-year-old’s debut Dutch author Marieke Lucas Rijneveld has become one of the youngest writers to be shortlisted for a Booker prize, after their debut novel made the fin …
'House of Leaves changed my life': the cult novel at 20 Summary: The origin of Mark Z Danielewski’s debut novel House of Leaves sounds like something from the book itself: a messy bundle of papers that circulated in …
Ravel: La Valse; Mussorgsky: Pictures review - brilliantly lit, punchy and athletic The third release in François-Xavier Roth’s survey of Ravel’s orchestral music with the period instruments of Les Siècles pairs two works from the yea …
Novelist urges volunteers to be infected with coronavirus Fit and healthy volunteers should be deliberately infected with Covid-19 so they can help fight the pandemic after their recovery, the novelist and NH …
Cristina: no wave's daring darling captured the beautiful and damned For a brief moment in the early 80s, ZE Records could reasonably call itself the hippest label in the world, but it was deeply peculiar enterprise fro …
Dua Lipa: 'You have to be made of steel not to let words get to you' Summary: Dua Lipa knew two things before starting the follow-up to her massive self-titled 2017 debut: she would call it Future Nostalgia, and it would be “an …
Our new normal: why so many of us feel unprepared for lockdown life Before the lockdown, I went to see a friend who lives a few miles away in south London. I cycled from Nunhead to her home in Blackheath. On the way I …
Footprints by David Farrier review – fossils of the Anthropocene David Farrier’s idea in this book is to try and imagine our present moment of climate and ecological crisis from a far-distant future. What fossil tra …
Stefano Bollani: Variations on Jesus Christ Superstar review - jazz virtuosity driven by teenage love Stefano Bollani, the technically dazzling and hugely entertaining pianist, composer, broadcaster and writer from Milan, was once a classically trained …
Yaeji: What We Drew 우리가 그려왔던 review – dance music for an existential crisis Korean-American DJ and producer Yaeji – full name Kathy Yaeji Lee – is the queen of introverted club music. She broke through with her squelchy house …
Maggie O’Farrell: ‘Life is too short to waste time on books you don’t like' The book I am currently reading Danielle Evans’s Before You Suffocate Your Own Fool Self. I picked it not knowing anything about her – that fabulous t …
M Ward: Migration Stories review – expanding the borders of Americana A quarter of a century ago, on the song Windfall, Son Volt conjured a lyric that pretty much captures the modus operandi of M Ward: “Catching an all-n …
Minor Science: Second Language review – expectation-defying beats The inspiration behind Minor Science’s debut album is one that’s sure to resonate with many of his fellow English-speaking electronic music artists an …
Europa28 review – female writers on Europe's future Europa28 is an ambitious project organised by the Hay festival aiming to highlight the contribution of European women across literature, science and t …
Booksellers struggle with lack of new stock amid Covid-19 crisis Amazon has denied reports that it is no longer accepting new deliveries of books to its warehouses while prioritising essential goods amid the coronav …
Tiger King and a bloody mary: Hilary Mantel, Simon Armitage and other writers on lockdown life ‘I’ve been rereading the book I wish I’d written’ Hilary Mantel Sad days if you don’t read much, and members of my household run a mile from my recomm …
Bill Withers, influential soul singer behind Ain't No Sunshine, dies aged 81 Bill Withers, the influential US soul singer who wrote Lean on Me, Ain’t No Sunshine and Lovely Day has died aged 81 of heart complications, according …
Joe Diffie obituary Between 1990 and 2004, Joe Diffie was one of the most commercially successful artists in country music, notching up more than 30 singles on Billboard’ …
Bill Withers: the brilliant folk-soul star who said it all with time to spare Plenty of rock and pop artists have unexpectedly announced their retirement, but hardly any of them have stuck to the decision. Something invariably d …
Bill Withers: his 10 greatest songs, from Lovely Day to Lean on Me Ain’t No Sunshine (Just As I Am, 1971) Questlove called Bill Withers “the last African-American Everyman … the closest thing black people have to a Br …
My Dark Vanessa by Kate Elizabeth Russell review – a powerful, shocking debut The literary exploration of sexual consent is nothing new, but the change in attitudes that allowed #MeToo to flourish has galvanised a new reckoning. …
Lil Nas X: ‘I 100% want to represent the LGBT community’ When Lil Nas X was growing up in the small, conservative community of Lithia Springs outside Atlanta, Georgia, he was sure of two things. One: he want …
Indian Sun by Oliver Craske review – a virtuosic portrait of Ravi Shankar Forever photographed sitting cross-legged and clutching his sitar, with incense burning, Ravi Shankar has been credited with almost single-handedly sp …
Poem of the month: The drive home by Craig Coyle after a nightshift at 7am in the hyperbaric oxygen chamber of your shiny car rain draining off the windscreen as you are lifted into daylight you thin …
Jacqueline Wilson reveals publicly that she is gay Jacqueline Wilson has spoken publicly for the first time about her personal life, and the fact she has been living “very happily” with her partner Tri …
Jacqueline Wilson: 'I've never really been in any kind of closet' Summary: “I can’t think of a book where there’s a woman born into a working-class background, who in her 70s is living a very comfortable, upper-middle-class s …
'I was told there was no market for foody books set in rural France': Joanne Harris on writing Chocolat Last year marked the 20th anniversary of the publication of Chocolat. It seems an impossible distance away, and yet it also seems as if I could get ba …
Thundercat: It Is What It Is review – love, loss and hyper-speed star jumps Few virtuoso jazz bassists could a spend a decade in a legendary thrash punk band and then swap all the shredding to tour with Snoop Dogg, purveyor of …
Fans pay tribute to F Scott Fitzgerald in worldwide Facebook gathering Summary: The most glamorous and madcap of all literary honeymoons began this weekend 100 years ago as newlyweds Zelda and F Scott Fitzgerald, future stars of t …
Sinne Eeg and the Danish Radio Big Band: We've Just Begun review – believe the hype Summary: So many superlatives have been showered upon Danish singer Sinne Eeg that you wonder whether anyone could be that good – or was this yet another case …
Emily St John Mandel: 'I admire novelists who are pushing the form forward' Emily St John Mandel is a Canadian novelist now residing in New York. Her fourth novel, the dystopian fiction of Station Eleven, propelled her to fame …
Book clinic: which books help kids with Asperger's to understand others? Q: My 11-year-old son has Asperger’s and finds relating to others and understanding social conventions very difficult. Which children’s novels would b …
Notes from an Apocalypse by Mark O’Connell – review While the publication dates of many books may have been pushed back in the light of the current crisis, this one is right on the money. Mark O’Connell …
Cultural clash: the trouble with writing about the lives of others Summary: Billed as the big page-turner of the season, My Dark Vanessa, American author Kate Elizabeth Russell’s first novel, is a tale for the Time’s Up genera …
A Theatre for Dreamers by Polly Samson review – sun, sex and Leonard Cohen It’s unlikely Polly Samson knew that her fifth novel would be launched into a world teetering on the edge of the abyss, but there is something calcula …
Mystery Jets: A Billion Heartbeats review – woke without the edge Unlikely survivors from the mid-00s glut of British guitar bands, Mystery Jets have never really deviated from the template they established with thei …
In brief: The Girl With the Louding Voice; Lanny; Fifty Miles Wide – review Summary: The Girl With the Louding Voice Abi Daré Hodder & Stoughton, £12.99, pp320 When Abi Daré was growing up in Lagos, she always wondered about the lives …
Ren Harvieu: Revel in the Drama review – a fresh start Ren Harvieu was a buzzed-about BBC Sound nominee in 2012, when she put out a passable debut of orchestral pop, made noteworthy by her smooth voice. It …
Bill Withers obituary The career of Bill Withers, who has died aged 81 of heart complications, followed an unusual trajectory. He did not try to enter the music industry un …
Alan Merrill obituary The singer and songwriter Alan Merrill, who has died aged 69 after contracting Covid-19, will be chiefly remembered for the song I Love Rock’n’Roll. M …
Stayin’ alive! How music has fought pandemics for 2,700 years Disease is on the prowl. As residents hide behind locked doors, barely a footstep is heard on Milan’s cobbled streets. A strict quarantine is in effec …
My favourite book as a kid: Green Eggs and Ham by Dr Seuss ‘Say! In the dark? Here in the dark? Would you, could you, in the dark?” Dr Seuss’s masterpiece – among his many masterpieces – is Green Eggs and Ham. …
'He dominated me!': the livestreaming beat battles shutting down lockdown ‘You’re bringing violins and saxophones to the war, blud!” says Skepta from behind his laptop, taunting producer Jae5 in an Instagram beat battle last …
Stevie Wonder: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Talking Book (1972) The man born Stevland Morris began the 1960s an 11-year-old harmonica prodigy and exited them as one of Mo …
Poem of the week: Easter by Róisín Kelly Easter You walk by holding a bunch of flowers never knowing that you’ve just performed a miracle. Are those flowers for your girl? I imagine her dress …
French writers' coronavirus getaways prompt backlash Summary: Leïla Slimani and Marie Darrieussecq may be two of France’s most acclaimed writers – but their accounts of life in lockdown in their second homes in t …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start with a “good read for the times”. Miss …
Maggie O'Farrell: how disease has shaped life as we know it When I was a teenager, a strange rumour began to circulate around the small Scottish seaside town where I lived. Roadworks were demolishing the corner …
Duffy praised by Rape Crisis for going public with details of ordeal A national rape charity has praised the bravery of the pop singer Duffy for going public with harrowing details of how she was drugged, held captive a …
Opera and classical concerts to watch at home: our critics' picks – week three Summary: Knussen/Ensemble Intercontemporain: Songs for Sue Searching for Oliver Knussen’s fantasy opera Where the Wild Things Are – his magical evocation of th …
Lady Gaga, Billie Eilish and Paul McCartney to play coronavirus benefit Summary: Lady Gaga is to curate One World: Together at Home, a live-streamed and televised benefit concert in support of the World Health Organization’s Covid- …
Our new lockdown game: judging famous people by their bookshelves Lockdown Britain has added a new dimension to one of readers’ favourite games: nosing around other people’s shelves. With broadcasters and politicians …
Young adult books round-up – review Summary: Holly Jackson’s A Good Girl’s Guide to Murder was last year’s big breakout debut, introducing schoolgirl turned detective Pippa Fitz-Amobi. The sequel …
John Prine, US folk and country songwriter, dies aged 73 due to Covid-19 complications John Prine, the US folk and country singer beloved of Bob Dylan, Kris Kristofferson and more, has died aged 73 due to complications from Covid-19. Pri …
John Prine: this extraordinarily gifted songwriter was the envy of all As John Prine often pointed out, he missed the height of the 1960s. Drafted into the US army, but fortunate enough to escape a tour of duty in Vietnam …
I've been reading more dystopian fiction than ever during the corona crisis. Here's why For the first time in my life, I am living with curtailed liberties. Living in the midst of a pandemic has left me with a disturbing sense of unrealit …
John Tavener's 'magical' last opera to be staged for first time A newly discovered opera by Sir John Tavener is to be staged for the first time after the late composer’s friend Prince Charles flagged up its potenti …
My favourite book as a kid: Charmed Life by Diana Wynne Jones I’ve actually reread Diana Wynne Jones’s Charmed Life twice in recent months: once, to check it was about the right level to read aloud to my kids, wh …
NVK by Temple Drake review – dark obsession in Shanghai As pseudonyms go, Temple Drake isn’t exactly a low-key choice. Adopted by the highly regarded Rupert Thomson for what is billed as “a modern twist on …
Hal Willner: music producer and SNL supervisor dies aged 64 The music producer and long-term Saturday Night Live music supervisor Hal Willner has died aged 64. No cause of death has been confirmed, but he was s …
Joan Baez: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Diamonds and Rust (1975) Invigorated by her new creative freedom after splitting with Vanguard Records in the early 1970s, Joa …
John Prine obituary John Prine, who has died aged 73 due to complications of Covid-19, was a highly influential American singer-songwriter. Musically, his style veered be …
'We will meet again': when a monarch brings comfort with a song It is 1939 and I am in bed listening to the king. He seems to be reading a poem. “I said to the man who stood at the gate of the year / Give me a ligh …
Radical Wordsworth, Well-Kept Secrets, William Wordsworth review – lives of the poet James Boswell started his biography of Dr Johnson on an anxious note: “To write the Life of him who excelled all mankind in writing the lives of other …
'Biography' of Nineteen Eighty-Four leads Orwell prize longlist Dorian Lynskey’s “biography” of George Orwell’s dystopian masterpiece Nineteen Eighty-Four has made it on to the longlist for the Orwell prize for pol …
Don't fear coronavirus, says Andrea Bocelli before Milan concert The Italian tenor Andrea Bocelli has encouraged people to “not be afraid” of coronavirus, as he prepares to sing in an empty Duomo di Milano on Easter …
Government rejects bid to turn Oscar Wilde’s prison into an arts centre The Ministry of Justice has rejected a bid to turn Reading prison, where Oscar Wilde was jailed for two years in 1895, into an arts centre. The Grade …
Top 10 books about Londoners Summary: The people of London have always been settlers from around the world, beginning with the Roman invaders who founded the city. While the growth of the …
Mrs Hinch cleans up with book sales as Britons tidy homes in lockdown Instagram “cleanfluencer” Mrs Hinch has toppled Hilary Mantel and David Walliams to return to the top of the book charts as Britons stuck at home turn …
Manic Street Preachers announce free arena show for NHS workers Manic Street Preachers have announced a pair of arena concerts to benefit NHS workers in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak. The trio announced the …
Donovan: 'Can you believe the Beatles and I were paying 96% tax?' Summary: Donovan, born Donovan Phillips Leitch in Scotland in 1946, was famous enough before he was 18 for the world to be on first-name terms with him. You do …
'I was shattered' – Paul Weller, Booker T and more on the day the Beatles split On 9 April 1970, a press release about a 27-year-old solo artist was sent to the media. Taking the form of a Q&A, most of it explained what his debut …
Nick Cave, Andy Griffiths and the $10,000 suit: how Melbourne's Crystal Ballroom launched a scene It arrives in a cardboard box, postmarked Brighton, UK. Black, with maroon pinstripes, the dry-cleaning tag still pinned to the lapel. It’s beautiful …
Apropos of Nothing by Woody Allen review – a life and an accusation In this memoir, Woody Allen is keen to clear up some misconceptions. He is not, as he has frequently been described, an intellectual. As a man who is …
2Pac: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Me Against the World (1995) Less than four years into his solo career, 2Pac already felt like an icon by the time he dropped M …
Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs: 'When music is loud, niggling troubles just go' Summary: When three future members of Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs first started jamming as teenagers in leafy Richmond in North Yorkshire, the locals be …
All About Sarah by Pauline Delabroy-Allard review – passion in Paris Two women meet at a dinner party. One is a teacher, the generally sensible mother of a young girl; the other is a flamboyant, beautiful violinist who …
The Bell in the Lake by Lars Mytting review – tales from a Norwegian village In 2015, Lars Mytting’s nonfiction handbook Norwegian Wood ignited in the British a love of chopping and stacking wood; his follow-up novel, The Sixte …
The day the Beatles broke up: fly away Paul - archive, April 1970 Beatle grip holds Paul by Jackie Leishman 11 April 1970 Paul McCartney confirmed yesterday that he had broken with the Beatles. But it seems certain t …
Parallel Lives by Phyllis Rose review – what makes a good marriage? Although Parallel Lives is subtitled “Five Victorian Marriages”, of the five couples whose joint biographies make up the subject matter of the book – …
Radiohead's Ed O'Brien: 'Humanity has only really learned from disaster' Summary: Ed O’Brien believed Radiohead’s turbulent years were behind him. It was 2001 and the guitarist and “band mum” had tamed egos, anchored stressful tours …
Wagner: Die Walküre review - Simon Rattle shapes orchestral excellence Summary: Over the last 15 years, Simon Rattle has conducted stagings of Wagner’s Ring several times – in Aix-en-Provence, Salzburg, and Vienna – and though at …
Laura Marling: Song for Our Daughter review – the intimate album we need Laura Marling has described her seventh solo album as a kind of conceptual work. Song for Our Daughter, she says, is about “trauma and an enduring que …
‘Weird tale’ by Secret Garden author Frances Hodgson Burnett discovered The darker side of Frances Hodgson Burnett, author of classic children’s novels including The Secret Garden and Little Lord Fauntleroy, is set to be r …
Laurel Halo's lockdown listening: 'There's this element of human touch' I was joking recently that electronic musicians have been self-isolating for years, so we are practiced at this. All my gigs were cancelled, and so ti …
Adam Schlesinger obituary Summary: Adam Schlesinger, who has died aged 52 from complications of Covid-19 infection, found critical kudos and a dedicated following with his band Fountain …
Tom Misch's lockdown listening: 'I don’t even realise how much I’m nerding out' My debut album, Geography, was a jolly, summery record, but when I made it I was going through a breakup, I was by myself a lot, it was summer and I w …
Hailu Mergia: Yene Mircha review – ear-worming, sonically adventurous grooves Ethiopian multi-instrumentalist Hailu Mergia’s backstory is one of “world music” cliche. Gaining fame in his home country as the organ and synth playe …
How Pale the Winter Has Made Us by Adam Scovell review – fever dreams in Strasbourg For readers attracted to stylistically challenging fiction, Adam Scovell’s debut novel, Mothlight, was one of last year’s treasures. Especially impres …
The Strokes: The New Abnormal review – old magic lights fresh sparks Summary: The Strokes are back, and this time nobody likes them. At least, that’s the impression frontman Julian Casablancas seems keen to impart on the band’s …
DJ Python: Mas Amable review - 'deep reggaeton' pioneer mines lithe beats for heart and feet From dembow’s influence on Justin Bieber’s Purpose to the rise of international reggaeton superstars J Balvin and Bad Bunny, tresillo rhythms have bee …
Marina Lewycka: 'The most underrated book? Collins Complete DIY Manual' Summary: The book I am currently reading Olga Tokarczuk’s Drive Your Plow Over the Bones of the Dead. I’d had this book for a while, and in an uncharacteristic …
Tracks of the week reviewed: the Hotrats, Rihanna and Chai The Hotrats Milkshake In lockdown, where Pringles dipped in peanut butter is an acceptable breakfast, it’s hard to know what we actually need. Do we r …
My Twitter listening parties are like gigs - but nobody nicks your beer It’s hard to write music during lockdown. A lot of songwriters I’ve spoken to just aren’t getting inspired at the moment. I did try. I wrote a song ca …
Isolation skills with Enya? The pop star masterclasses we want to see Look, you know the deal. We’re in a global pandemic, and everyone has to do what they can to help other people. It might be shopping for your elderly …
Larry Sherman, founder of pioneering dance label Trax, dies of heart failure Larry Sherman, whose record label Trax changed the face of dance music, has died of heart failure. The news was confirmed by the current head of Trax, …
Mike Appleton obituary Starting with virtually no budget and the smallest studio in the BBC’s Television Centre, Mike Appleton turned The Old Grey Whistle Test into the most …
'Treated us like simpletons': Pedro Almodóvar criticises Madonna over documentary Oscar-winning Spanish film director Pedro Almodóvar has written “a settling of scores” in a long diary entry written during the coronavirus lockdown, …
Methyl Ethel, Tropical Fuck Storm, Mama Kin and more: Australian music for isolated times We’ve published a bunch of articles about how the coronavirus crisis has impacted the Australian arts industry. The damage was compounded last week wh …
'What it means to be an American': Abraham Lincoln and a nation divided Summary: Ted Widmer has published a book about a time of national crisis, in a time of national crisis. Lincoln on the Verge follows the 16th president on his …
Aria by Nazanine Hozar review – an epic tale of turmoil in Tehran Unwanted by her father and so abandoned by her mother, in 1953 a baby girl is found under a mulberry tree in wealthy north Tehran. Carrying her home t …
Recommending books is high risk – but it's also high reward Summary: Recommending books is a tricky but satisfying business. It’s high risk, high reward. Every day I wake up to messages from my friends asking me to reco …
Deborah Levy's lockdown diary: 'My daughters would prefer it if I freaked out more' Tuesday 17 March 2020 I know you don’t want to read another coronavirus diary. Frankly, neither do I. Maybe I can strike a different tone. Here goes. …
One to watch: Valentina Valentina is a bit of a secret weapon in the world of indie electronica. The English-Italian artist (surname Pappalardo) has sung on Hot Chip’s return …
On my radar: Laura Marling's cultural highlights Singer-songwriter Laura Marling was born in 1990, and brought up in a village in Hampshire. She released her debut album, Alas, I Cannot Swim, the wee …
James Elkington: Ever-Roving Eye review – a slow-burn delight “Mid-Atlantic” is usually a somewhat damning term in pop, applied to soft rock originating from, say, Croydon but aspiring to be Californian. In the c …
Book clinic: are there any books as clever and amusing as Bridget Jones? Q: I need a good laugh. Can you recommend something as smart, funny and deft as the first Bridget Jones novel? Anonymous quality controller, 40 A: Emm …
Notre-Dame review – an engrossing history of  'the soul of France' Until late into the evening of 15 April last year, I stood with what felt like half of Paris in the Quai de Bourbon on the Ile St Louis, perhaps 150 m …
Yaeji: What We Drew 우리가 그려왔던 review – eclectic electronica Billed as a mixtape, Yaeji’s first full-length album is an uncategorisable treat that surfs the cusp of club music, sickly sweet pop and the blithe me …
One to watch: Jockstrap Bands often have names that summon up their sound, but not Jockstrap. Far from a macho, musky proposition, they write fantastically eccentric songs th …
Indie turns to Kindie as post-punk German bands woo pre-schools Summary: Fans usually age with the bands they love, but in recent months Johannes von Weizsäcker has seen the mosh pit at his gigs fill with an unusually youth …
Passions denied: my first Easter without the mysteries and joys of Bach Music has its seasons. So much, in centuries past, was written for the church year. As the days lengthen, still cool but bright, trees turning green, …
In Brief: On Chapel Sands; Nobody Will Tell You This But Me  – reviews Summary: On Chapel Sands Laura Cumming Vintage, £9.99, 320pp In 1929, the author’s mother, then three, went missing from a Lincolnshire beach where she was pla …
Hamilton Leithauser: The Loves of Your Life review – crooning glory Summary: Four of the five band members have reappeared as solo artists after their “extreme hiatus” announced in 2013, but it is frontman Hamilton Leithauser w …
Poem constructed from emails received during quarantine goes viral Everyone has received at least one and now they’ve been elevated to poetry: a US teacher has highlighted corporate opportunism during the coronavirus …
Indie label on isle of Eigg turns lockdown into source of inspiration As the rest of the UK resists the temptation to head outside during a hot Easter bank holiday, a music label on the tiny Hebridean isle of Eigg is mak …
From Blyton to Bryson: comfort reading to enjoy during lockdown Although many superb new books are still being published we also sometimes need a dose of the familiar. So here are some recommendations for comfort r …
Grace Jones: where to start in her back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Private Life: The Compass Point Sessions (1998) “I think I’d have to say The Best of the Beatles.” So decreed Alan Partridge w …
Silver Sparrow by Tayari Jones review – daddy's girls with a difference As opening sentences go, Silver Sparrow’s is a belter: “My father, James Witherspoon, is a bigamist,” declares Dana Lynn Yarboro, setting the pace for …
Poem of the week: Can I fight the power? by Kev Inn Can I fight the power? A meditation on ‘post-raciality’ Can I fight the power? Nah, she didn’t say I wolf whistled, but this girl tried to pet me, Can …
Opera and classical concerts to watch at home: our critics' picks – week four Philharmonia/Klemperer: Beethoven’s Ninth (June 1970) Otto Klemperer made his final public appearance at the Royal Festival Hall in London in 1971, bu …
Hidden Robert Dover poem uncovered in 17th century plea roll Summary: A hidden poem found in dusty early 17th century legal parchments at the National Archives has shed fresh light on a colourful character who moved in t …
Stella prize 2020: watch the $50,000 literary award announcement here The Stella prize has been a major feature of the Australian literary landscape since it was first awarded in 2013. The annual award celebrates the bes …
Jess Hill wins $50,000 Stella prize for See What You Made Me Do, book investigating domestic violence “Domestic abuse and coercive control steals people’s language away from them,” says Jess Hill. She has spent the past six years of her life trying to …
Reasons to Be Cheerful delivers laughs with real tenderness Summary: When Nina Stibbe’s Reasons to Be Cheerful won last year’s Wodehouse Bollinger prize for comic fiction, the judges explained that it was because it mad …
City Lights devotees give $500,000 to help bookshop survive coronavirus City Lights, the iconic San Francisco bookshop and publisher founded by Lawrence Ferlinghetti in 1953, has raised almost half a million dollars in fou …
Dystopia with hot chocolate: Tales from the Loop's author on his low-key sci-fi Summary: If you think you’ve never seen Simon Stålenhag’s art before, you could well be wrong. His paintings often turn up online under headlines such as This …
Musical notes: how is pop music changing during the pandemic? We’re comfort-listening Alexis Petridis, chief music critic Last night I found myself listening to the Flaming Lips’ 1999 album The Soft Bulletin, and …
The Frightened Ones by Dima Wannous review – love and loneliness in Syria Summary: Midway through Dima Wannous’s novel, the narrator recalls a neighbour who fell sick during a dire shortage of doctors and medicine. The woman’s daught …
Brian May blames meat-eating for rise of coronavirus Brian May, guitarist with Queen, has criticised meat-eating and cited it as the cause of coronavirus, despite a lack of scientific consensus over the …
In a time of crisis, the magic of Pharrell's Happy is needed more than ever It feels like a bit of a sick joke dropped in the midst of coronavirus: it was announced on Monday that Pharrell’s Happy was the most played song on B …
Bruce Springsteen: where to start in his back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Born to Run (1975) By 1974, Bruce Springsteen was two albums deep, with a reputation as an urgent, vivid young songwriter. Mai …
Britain's War by Daniel Todman review – a new world at home as old power is lost Summary: A New World, 1942-1947, Daniel Todman’s second volume of Britain’s War – the first was published four years ago – picks up the story after the entry o …
Should I stay or should I go: how coronavirus is jeopardising music festivals For many in the live music industry, 2020 is over. Big festivals in the UK such as Glastonbury and Download are cancelled. London’s month-long Meltdow …
My favourite book as a kid: Sabriel by Garth Nix It’s rare that I return to books. By and large, I read them once and never again. Perhaps it’s because I’m conscious of how many stories there are in …
Tomie dePaola obituary Summary: The American illustrator and author Tomie dePaola, who has died aged 85, was best known for his book Strega Nona (1975), which tells the story of a wi …
Margaret Atwood to showcase gothic puppet show for Mary Beard Margaret Atwood will show how she has gone from handmaids’ tales to handmade tales when she unveils her latest project: a puppet show version of Edgar …
'All words are not equal': the debut novelist who's become a lockdown sensation Summary: In an episode of historical comedy series Blackadder the Third, Dr Samuel Johnson presents to the King the dictionary he’s toiled on for 10 years. The …
'Frontline': is it misleading to apply military metaphors to medicine? Summary: In these times we are rightly encouraged to appreciate the work of the “frontline” staff of the NHS and other essential services. But does it make sen …
How a Finnish BDSM movie breathed new life into a Baroque cliche Even if you don’t listen to Classic FM or have an album called something like “Baroque Classics”, the chances are that you’d recognise Albinoni’s Adag …
The Infinite by Patience Agbabi review – time-travel adventure The heroine of poet Patience Agbabi’s debut novel, for eight-to-12 year olds, is special in several ways. Twelve-year-old Elle lives in a British town …
Lee Konitz, jazz saxophonist with 75-year career, dies of coronavirus aged 92 Jazz saxophonist Lee Konitz, whose 75-year career stretched back to the big band era, has died aged 92 after contracting Covid-19. He died in a New Yo …
Rina Sawayama's lockdown listening: 'I'm fermenting stuff and playing Animal Crossing' I’m in my house with my housemate in nice Zone 3 London, with a garden and a new barbecue – though I forgot the coals, so I don’t know how we’ll cook …
Hood Feminism and Feminism Interrupted review – non-white women take back power Summary: “I am a strong person; I am a flawed person. What I am not is superhuman. Nor am I a Strong Black WomanTM.” With this sentence, from the introduction …
‘Dress rehearsal for catastrophe’: how Stoics are speaking to locked-down readers ‘Be like the rocky headland on which the waves constantly break. It stands firm, and round it the seething waters are laid to rest. ‘It is my bad luck …
Lee Konitz obituary The music critic Gary Giddins once likened the alto saxophone playing of Lee Konitz, who has died aged 92 from complications of Covid-19, to the sound …
Shabazz Palaces: The Don of Diamond Dreams review – alchemy in a world of algorithms Ishmael “Butterfly” Butler’s days as part of Grammy-winning golden age hip-hop group Digable Planets are almost out of sight. Few in music – let alone …
Jean Middlemiss obituary My friend Jean Middlemiss, who has died aged 94, was a distinguished musician and teacher. Profoundly inspired by Dr Shinichi Suzuki’s innovative meth …
'I’m just like Anne Frank, like Indiana Jones': Bob Dylan continues return to new songs Bob Dylan has continued to release his first original music in eight years, with a song in which he seemingly compares himself to Anne Frank, Indiana …
Fiona Apple: Fetch the Bolt Cutters review – a glorious eruption The re-emergence of Fiona Apple, eight years after her last studio album, is not quite dolphins returning to the waterways of Venice, but an argument …
Endell Street by Wendy Moore review – the suffragette surgeons In 1920, as part of an exhibition on women’s war work, the Imperial War Museum planned to display a sketch of a busy operating theatre at Endell Stree …
Lea Bertucci: Acoustic Shadows review – mesmeric 4D sound New York composer Lea Bertucci made her name as an unorthodox saxophonist – some of her most compelling performances see her playing alto sax or bass …
Sally Rooney: 'I want the next thing I do to be the best thing I’ve ever done' Summary: The book I am currently reading Margaret Drabble’s 1972 novel The Needle’s Eye. This is only the third of Drabble’s books I’ve read, and I’ve admired …
Johnny Depp and Jeff Beck announce album with cover of John Lennon's Isolation Johnny Depp has announced his latest musical project, an album made with 75-year-old blues-rock guitarist Jeff Beck. Announcing the collaboration with …
Stars including Paul McCartney and Emilia Clarke to share stories of NHS care in new book Adam Kay, who has topped bestseller charts with his stories of life as as junior doctor in This Is Going to Hurt, is pulling together a book of “love …
Everyone’s stuck at home – so why are people streaming less music? Major album releases used to be put through a Large Hadron Collider of marketing, but now almost everything making those promotion particles accelerat …
Gerry Cinnamon: The Bonny review – Scottish stadium sensation keeps it simple There’s a narrative around Scottish singer-songwriter Gerry Cinnamon that he has achieved his success – selling 50,000 tickets for Hampden Park stadiu …
All alone online:  Iggy Pop and Jeremy Irons lead mass Ancient Mariner reading “Alone, alone, all, all alone.” The cry of the Ancient Mariner, immortalised by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, feels particularly apposite today as the worl …
Every Drop of Blood review: how Lincoln's Second Inaugural bound America's wounds Summary: As Abraham Lincoln prepared to take the oath of office for a second time, on 4 March 1865, the nation waited to hear what he would say about its futur …
‘I’m not trying to be anything I’m not’: rapper Aitch on his rise to the top I’m just back from a big shop at Sainsbury’s,” announces Harrison Armstrong with a grin over our video call. “I’m watching MasterChef, Gogglebox, eati …
Barn 8  by Deb Olin Unferth review – the great chicken heist Deb Olin Unferth’s strange and brilliant second novel is a caper story about a motley crew of lovable criminals banding together to pull off the bigge …
One Two Three Four by Craig Brown review – all about the Beatles In the build-up to the general election of 1987, Margaret Thatcher agreed to an interview with Smash Hits, the now defunct fortnightly pop magazine th …
On the trail of a Nazi war criminal: 'It's my duty as a son to find the good in my father' ‘I do not want my children to believe that my husband is a war criminal’ Charlotte Wächter, 1977 In the 1960s, my brother and I often visited our gran …
Isabel Hardman: 'One of my most exciting botanical finds was in a Glasgow car park' Isabel Hardman is assistant editor of the Spectator and author of The Natural Health Service: What the Great Outdoors Can Do for Your Mind. She was di …
Garth Greenwell: 'Sex is an extraordinary subject for a writer' Garth Greenwell’s second book, Cleanness, seems to flow directly from his sumptuous, sensuous debut, What Belongs to You. Like its predecessor, the ne …
The Better Half: On the Genetic Superiority of Women review – bold study of chromosomal advantage Summary: It was noticeable from the initial outbreak in Wuhan that Covid-19 was killing more men than women. By February, data from China, which involved 44,67 …
Dorothy Day review: biography of a radical rebel is the masterpiece she deserves An iconoclast with a long, peripatetic life is an ideal subject for a biography. Add in motley enthusiasms and fierce convictions, plus connections to …
Anne-Marie: 'I just want to make people smile' The pop star Anne-Marie has squirrelled herself away in an alcove, in a corner of a café in south London. It is the middle of February, and she has be …
Zonal by Don Paterson review – rich, masked musings on midlife crisis There is a scene in the black-and-white sci-fi TV programme The Twilight Zone, created by Rod Serling, where a character is unmasked only to reveal a …
Sitopia by Carolyn Steel review – big questions about food In the opening passages of Sitopia, Carolyn Steel talks about the “Google Burger”, a €250,000 (£218,000) prototype piece of cultured meat, grown in a …
Black, blue and very bad taste: the Rolling Stones billboard that still sparks controversy Even by the standards of 1970s rock’n’roll, it was in bad taste: a billboard on Sunset Boulevard of a bruised and bound woman sitting on a gatefold co …
EOB: Earth review – Radiohead's Ed O'Brien goes eclectic “I’m not a Ronaldo or a Rooney: that’s Thom and Jonny,” said Radiohead’s second guitarist, Ed O’Brien, in 2008. “But in my dreams I’m a Paul Scholes.” …
Naoise Dolan: 'I'm not good at presenting myself as likable' It’s the author’s equivalent of the no-trousers-in-class nightmare: your first book is finally published but almost every bookshop across the world is …
One World: Together at Home review – locked-down stars lift the spirits With Together at Home, Lady Gaga brought together music stars from around the world to give everyone something they so desperately need at this time o …
David Bowie bassist Matthew Seligman, 64, dies of coronavirus A former bass guitarist who appeared on stage with David Bowie at the Live Aid concert has died after spending two weeks on a ventilator at St George’ …
Carol Ann Duffy leads British poets creating 'living record' of coronavirus Carol Ann Duffy has launched an international poetry project with major names including Imtiaz Dharker, Roger McGough and Ian McMillan, as a response …
Poem of the week: Safe Houses by Bernard O’Donoghue Safe Houses I find that I have started recently to keep spare keys to the front door in several pockets, such is my fear of being locked out. Caught b …
International Booker prize postponed due to coronavirus The six authors up for this year’s International Booker prize will have to wait a little longer to find out who won. The announcement has been postpon …
My favourite book as a kid: Mister God, This is Anna by Fynn Funny, how rereading a book means turning the page back to an earlier self. Not funny ha-ha, I admit. But the art that has great significance to us is …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. First, a reflection on our times from Hedgehogtrot …
‘This is beyond the Great Depression’: will comic books survive coronavirus? There are no new comic books. Steve Geppi, head of Diamond Comic Distributors, which distributes nearly every comic sold in the anglophone world (or u …
The world my book is published into looks very different from the world I started writing in In the place where writers keep talismans that egg them on and freak them out, I keep a quote from an article that discusses where consciousness “live …
We Are Attempting to Survive Our Time by AL Kennedy review - wise, funny, human tales Summary: My social media timelines are full of people posed looking serious with weighty novels, announcing gravely that they’ll be seeing out their coronaviru …
MBS: The Rise to Power of Mohammed bin Salman review – riveting account In early March, just days before the American publication of this biography of Mohammed bin Salman, the crown prince of Saudi Arabia, news broke of th …
How Nina Stibbe found her voice Often the first bit of advice given to aspiring writers is: “Find your own voice.” Just as often, it’s also the most useless. And before I read Nina S …
'They made Sex Pistols sound like Take That': the fury of Midlands punk In the late 1970s, Mike Stone changed punk for ever from the boot of a BMW. He had started Clay Records from a tiny record shop in Stoke-on-Trent, and …
Philip Pullman: ministers should face charges if Brexit politics slowed PPE Summary: Philip Pullman has said that the UK government “should be arraigned on charges of conspiracy to murder” if it is found that “for Brexit-related reason …
Sophie Ellis-Bextor on music, motherhood and lockdown discos: ‘Most of my children are feral!’ If there has been a small moment of joy in lockdown, it was the image of a silver-clad Sophie Ellis-Bextor, sequin-spattered kids in tow, performing h …
Ronan O'Rahilly: pirate radio's godfather made a sea change in British pop Summary: Ronan O’Rahilly was nothing if not a man with a lot of ideas. The problem was that a lot of them were the kind of ideas that might lead you to think t …
LGBTQ children’s books face record calls for bans in US libraries Attempts to remove books from libraries across the US rose almost a fifth last year, with children’s books featuring LGBTQ characters making up 80% of …
Women’s prize for fiction shortlist led by Mantel, Evaristo and O'Farrell Set in an Elizabethan England haunted by the threat of plague, Maggie O’Farrell’s unexpectedly timely novel about the death of Shakespeare’s son, Hamn …
Set the Night on Fire by Mike Davis and Jon Wiener review – the real LA in the 1960s To its profit and enduring loss, there is probably no city in human history that has been more promiscuously imagined than Los Angeles. For the better …
My favourite book as a kid: Pookie by Ivy Wallace Summary: ‘Please,” asks Pookie in his very first outing into the world of children’s literature, “what does a fortune look like?” “Now, that is awkward!” repli …
Slayer: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with Reign in Blood (1986) In 1986, thrash truly emerged from its classic, generally British, heavy metal influences, with the “big …
The Butchers by Ruth Gilligan review – scepticism v superstition An ancient curse warns that if eight men do not touch every cow in Ireland as it dies, pestilence will fall upon the land. And so eight butchers trave …
Cardi B schools Bernie and Bhad Bhabie goes 'brownface': rappers in quarantine Summary: Yes, rappers and R&B stars are still losing their minds while social distancing. As the at-home boredom grows, Cardi B is turning her streams into Bro …
Top 10 Latin American short stories Summary: Short stories: how not to despair with the unjust way they are treated in the world of British letters? From their frequent definition in terms of wha …
'You're not welcome': rap's racial divide in France Dave’s Mercury prize-winning debut album, Psychodrama, was the biggest-selling British rap album in the UK in 2019, certified gold for selling more th …
Terry Clarke obituary My husband Terry Clarke, who has died aged 72, was a singer-songwriter of great poetic powers. He released 14 albums across a fruitful career that rev …
The whole world in a bedroom: seven of the most imaginative picture books for lockdown life Schools are all but closed. Playgrounds are wrapped in hazard tape. Swimming pools, national parks, holidays, birthday parties, cinemas, zoos, grandpa …
John Coates obituary Summary: My husband, John Coates, who has died suddenly of heart disease aged 76, was a literary critic and an authority on GK Chesterton. His book Chesterton …
Whitney Houston: 'no holds barred' biopic in the works from Clive Davis Summary: Whitney Houston’s life is set to be the subject of a big-screen biopic from the Grammy-winning producer Clive Davis and the singer’s estate. According …
Giving the Devil His Due by Michael Shermer – a defence of free speech Pick up a book, any book. Is it dedicated to “my friends Christopher Hitchens and Steven Pinker, peerless champions of liberty”? Does it have cover pu …
Britons are reading more in lockdown, says survey for World Book Night Brits are turning to books in lockdown, with one in three reading more since Boris Johnson told the country on 23 March to stay at home, according to …
Enter the Aardvark by Jessica Anthony review – achingly funny farce Who would have guessed that a satire about an oily Republican congressman, 19th-century taxidermy and a creature so ugly it resembles “a pig screwed b …
'A coldness that masks a burning rage': South Korea's female writers rise up In May 2016, a 23-year-old South Korean woman was murdered in a public toilet near Gangnam station in Seoul. Her attacker claimed in court that “he ha …
Lorenzo Senni: Scacco Matto review – rave poet dials up the intensity ‘Where’s the drop?” This was a complaint often howled at festivals or in YouTube comment sections during the EDM years (usually by a hench guy in a ve …
Pandemic! by Slavoj Žižek review – the philosopher provides his solution The dates are by now well-rehearsed. 31 December: China informs the World Health Organisation that cases of pneumonia with an unknown cause have been …
Amazon revealed as mystery £250,000 donor to UK bookshops Amazon, the internet retail giant vilified for years as public enemy No 1 to booksellers, has been revealed as the surprise mystery benefactor that do …
My favourite book as a kid: The Phantom Tollbooth by Norton Juster ‘There was once a boy called Milo who didn’t know what to do with himself – not just sometimes but always.” So begins The Phantom Tollbooth, Norton Ju …
Spotify's 'tip jar' is a slap in the face for musicians. It should pay them better Wednesday’s announcement by the government’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, that social distancing in the UK could last for the rest of the year …
Véronique Gens: Nuits review - is there another singer this compelling? Véronique Gens’s recording of Chausson’s Poème de l’Amour et la Mer was one of last year’s outstanding releases, and a song by Chausson also forms the …
No-prorogation justice Lady Hale to publish memoir and guide to the law Lady Hale, who presided over the momentous decision to rule Boris Johnson’s prorogation of parliament unlawful, is set to write her memoirs, of how “a …
Kaitlyn Aurelia Smith's lockdown listening: 'Doing handstands, that’s the time for music' I live in Los Angeles with my husband in a quiet neighbourhood that looks out on the Verdugo Hills. One of our best friends lives right behind us, so …
The Rolling Stones release Living In a Ghost Town, first original music since 2012 The Rolling Stones have released their first original music since 2012, a new – and rather apocalyptic – single called Living in a Ghost Town. Mick Ja …
Lions, tigers and bears: the US presidents who took animal ownership to extremes Barack Obama had two Portuguese water dogs, Bo and Sunny. George W Bush had scottish terriers named Barney and Miss Beazley. Bill Clinton had a cat ca …
The Rolling Stones: Living in a Ghost Town review – their best new song in years The coronavirus outbreak is clearly going to inform a lot of rock and pop music in the not-too-distant future, but who would have thought that the Rol …
First Nations people have faced moments like this before. We can learn from the poems that sprang from them This is not unprecedented. Not the presence of a new disease. Not the enforced social measures that fragment how we interact, and who with. Not the la …
Lucinda Williams: 'I don't mind pushing people's buttons' Lucinda Williams has been sleep-talking more than usual. One night last week, she dreamed that Mormons invaded her house, converted her friends and st …
At the drive-in: ENO to stage opera at a safe physical distance Drive-in entertainment, a staple of 1950s America, is on its way to the UK – but not for the latest blockbuster or trashy horror film. English Nationa …
Come Again by Robert Webb review – entertaining debut novel ﻿Robert Webb’s first book, the memoir How Not to Be a Boy, established that as well as being funny on the telly he could write both sensitively and we …
Niall Horan's lockdown listening: 'Pop is definitely at its best right now' I’m in London in my apartment, cooking – I’m making a Victoria sponge right now – and writing a lot: two songs yesterday. I had to cancel my tour, so …
BC Camplight: Shortly After Takeoff review – a tumultuous pop masterpiece Brian Christinzio’s fifth album as BC Camplight is a marvel, in which currents cut across each other in a half hour or so that roils with anxiety, stu …
The Address Book by Deirdre Mask review – what's in a street name? According to Deirdre Mask, “most households in the world don’t have street addresses”. That includes many parts of rural America. When Mask took a tri …
Beyoncé gives $6m to coronavirus relief, including mental health causes Beyoncé has announced a donation of $6m for mental health and other initiatives during the coronavirus outbreak. The singer teamed up with Twitter fou …
New York Metropolitan Opera hosts starry lockdown gala Glitzy galas are a regular feature of the opera calendar, but a lockdown gala – with many of the world’s best-known singers performing from their home …
André Aciman: 'I couldn’t finish Moby-Dick. I lacked the patience' The book I am currently reading The Republic of False Truths by Alaa al-Aswany, a dentist who lived and practised in Cairo until he moved to the west …
Kirsty Merryn: Our Bright Night review – thieves, sailors and nuns mix heady balm As a spring like no other in our lifetime begins, Kirsty Merryn’s second album takes us into darkness. It begins at Twilight, literally, and moves us …
Taylor Swift disowns new live album, calling it 'shameless greed' Summary: Taylor Swift has disowned a new live album released under her name, calling it tasteless and “shameless greed” amid the coronavirus outbreak. The albu …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Fiona Apple, Charli XCX, Kiesza Fiona Apple I Want You to Love Me Right on time, Fiona “This world is bullshit” Apple returns to claim her throne as generational soothsayer with her …
Why Willem Dafoe, Iggy Pop and more are reading The Rime of the Ancient Mariner to us Roaring out of the radical 1790s, The Rime of the Ancient Mariner is a founding fable for our time. A fable must by definition revolve around an anima …
The best recent crime and thrillers – review roundup The Last Protector (HarperCollins, £14.99) is the fourth novel in Andrew Taylor’s outstanding 17th-century series featuring government agent James Mar …
'We had a drag queen party': the Britons in lockdown on a Panama beach If you’ve ever been at a festival on a Monday morning and thought it was something that might happen at the end of the world, you might have some symp …
Author of book about victim blaming bombarded with misogynist abuse A British academic whose new book is about why women are blamed for crimes committed against them has been subjected to thousands of coordinated attac …
Captain Tom Moore becomes oldest artist to claim UK No 1 single Captain Tom Moore, who turns 100 on 30 April, has become the oldest artist ever to claim the UK No 1 spot with his cover of You’ll Never Walk Alone, a …
Can't finish a novel right now? Essays are the perfect cure It’s not happening. And when I say “it”, I mean anything but worrying, batch cooking and donating to crowdfunding sites that offer support while the g …
Sexy beats: how Normal People’s ‘intimacy coordinator’ works It’s easy to forget just how much sex there is in Sally Rooney’s Normal People, when many of its greatest romantic beats are carried in a furtive glan …
Circles and Squares by Caroline Maclean review – the Hampstead modernists In 1937 the art critic Myfanwy Evans published The Painter’s Object, an anthology of new essays by leading artists of the day including Pablo Picasso, …
Diana Gordon: the secret ingredient in Beyoncé’s Lemonade It is 11am LA time and Diana Gordon is feeling, as she puts it, “hazy”. We were meant to start our interview half an hour ago, but Gordon’s sleeping p …
You Let Me In by Camilla Bruce review – a fairytale with a twist ﻿At first glance, this smart, creepy fairy story has a familiar premise: the one in which a character blames her misfortune or misdeeds on supernatura …
Les Six & Satie: Works for Piano 4 Hands review – breathless charm The group of young French composers known as Les Six came together in the early 20th century in negative reaction to weighty German romanticism and a …
Pole: 123 review – calming, abstract, minimal genius The lockdown has played havoc with album release schedules, sending new records by Haim, Rufus Wainwright, Jarvis Cocker and the Pretenders back sever …
Tolstoy, Steinbeck, Defoe – why are so many turning to classic novels? Summary: There aren’t many aspects of the lockdown that the author Penelope Lively enjoys but reading Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland to her 27-year-old grand …
Santrofi: Alewa review – a welcome return for Ghanaian highlife Thanks to the lasting influence of the late Fela Kuti, Nigerian Afrobeat has enjoyed a recent resurgence in the west while its close cousin, Ghanaian …
Which novels or memoirs will help prepare me for motherhood? Q: Can you recommend any particularly good novels or memoirs about the experience of motherhood? I have a few months to prepare and this feels as impo …
Hamilton Bohannon, disco and Motown star, dies aged 78 Summary: The US disco, funk and soul musician Hamilton Bohannon, who backed Motown’s greats before starting a respected solo career, has died at age 78. No cau …
Music From the Home Front concert shows vitality and sensitivity can coexist Summary: It won’t be forever, but this is how we watch concerts now. Almost two months into isolation, after weeks of one-off or serialised livestreamed perfor …
In Deep review: Trump v intelligence – and Obama v the people The 2016 election left the US gaping at a brewing battle between the president-elect and the most senior members of the law enforcement and intelligen …
Clothes… and Other Things That Matter by Alexandra Shulman – review I’m not one of those people who believes that at a time like this clothes are unimportant. Obviously, lots of other things are immeasurably more impor …
Losing Eden: Why Our Minds Need the Wild by Lucy Jones; Wanderland by Jini Reddy – review Summary: When the first daffodils were blooming two months ago, the apocalyptic prologue to Lucy Jones’s Losing Eden would have felt urgent enough. It describe …
Lennon Stella:  Three. Two. One. review – a serene debut Lennon Stella was once half of the Canadian kid sister act Lennon & Maisy, who went viral in 2012 when they covered a Robyn song with margarine tub pe …
In brief: Magpie Lane; I Want You to Know We're Still Here; The Language of Birds – reviews Magpie Lane Lucy Atkins Quercus, £16.99, pp368 Nick is newly appointed as master of an Oxford college. Self-regarding to the point of narcissism, he l …
Sneakbo: 9 Lives review – joie de vivre from Afro bashment star Summary: The story goes that south London rapper Agassi Odusina – known to most as Sneakbo – once turned into a black cat when visiting Brixton McDonald’s. It’ …
The Metropolitan Opera’s At-Home Gala review – thrilling singing, live from the stars’ living-rooms In many ways, it was quite extraordinary. Streamed on its website, the Metropolitan Opera’s At-Home Gala, featured more than 40 of the house’s regular …
Could bringing Neanderthals back to life save the environment? The idea is not quite science fiction In 2015, flooding exposed the frozen bodies of two cave lion cubs in the Yakutia region of Russia. Members of a species that vanished at the end of th …
If It Bleeds review – Stephen King on vintage form Summary: Stephen King has made good use of the sometimes tricky novella form over his nearly 50-year career, often as a vehicle to explore ideas and styles tha …
Travelling to new worlds: the best translated literature Our individual love affairs with translated literature generally begin without us being really aware of them, starting with fairytales – Perrault, the …
I wish more people would read ... The Wonder Spot by Melissa Bank Summary: I find it very hard to talk about The Wonder Spot by Melissa Bank, even though I talk about it all the time. I’m completely obsessed with it, and I’m …
Majority of authors 'hear' their characters speak, finds study Some writers have always claimed they can hear their characters speaking, with Enid Blyton suggesting she could “watch and hear everything” and Alice …
Poem of the week: The New Divan by Edwin Morgan Three poems from The New Divan 1. Hafiz, old nightingale, what fires there have been in the groves, white dust, wretchedness, how could you ever get y …
Wiley: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Godfather (CTA Records, 2017) Wiley told the world: “Eskiboy’s the reason why everybody’s here” back in 2006, on the cult clas …
Tim Robinson obituary Tim Robinson, who has died aged 85 after contracting Covid-19, was a cartographer, visual artist and writer who made a sustained study of the landscap …
Nick Hornby: BBC should be 'untouchable' after coronavirus Summary: Author Nick Hornby has written an essay praising the BBC as “one of our crowning achievements as a nation”, saying that its handling of the coronaviru …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. To start, some book philosophy. A question from es …
Ahmed Ismail Hudeidi obituary The musician Ahmed Ismail Hudeidi, who has died aged 91, was the acknowledged king of the oud, a short-necked, lute-type instrument that is widely pla …
Opera and classical concerts to watch at home: our critics' picks – week six Quatuor Danel (Philharmonie de Paris) The French string quartet should have been a significant presence at the Wigmore Hall this spring, playing Shost …
Breaking Glass review – a suite of female composers smashing the mould for Australian arts “There is no reason for the sudden terror, the feeling of condemnation,” the poet Sylvia Plath wrote in her diaries, “except that circumstances all mi …
Hinton by Mark Blacklock review – tricksy tale of a disgraced scientist Mark Blacklock’s audacious 2015 debut, I’m Jack, drew on the troubled life of John Humble, the Wearside ex-convict who tricked police into believing t …
Terry Pratchett novels to get 'absolutely faithful' TV adaptations On what would have been the late Discworld creator’s 72nd birthday, Terry Pratchett’s production company Narrativia has announced a new development de …
A Journal of the Plague Year by Daniel Defoe is our reading group book for May This month, we’re going to read A Journal of the Plague Year by Daniel Defoe, free to read on Project Gutenberg. This has been a popular request, for …
Nina Stibbe webchat – your questions answered on comedy, Alan Bennett and amateur dentistry Thank you to Nina, who has been so generous with her time today. And thank you to you all for your great questions! Our next book on the Reading group …
Survey of London: Oxford Street review – a bravura history, but also an obituary? In all its years, the Survey of London has never before accorded an entire volume to a single road. Oxford Street stretches for more than a mile and e …
Jay-Z takes action against 'deepfakes' of him rapping Hamlet and Billy Joel Jay-Z’s company Roc Nation have filed takedown notices against “deepfake” videos that use artificial intelligence to make him rap Billy Joel’s We Didn …
The Flip by Jeffrey J Kripal review – it's time for a mystical revelation A few years ago the eminent American philosopher Thomas Nagel put quite a few celebrity scientist noses out of joint by publishing a book, entitled Mi …
Top 10 novels about moving What does it mean to move in these days? Once, there were many of us accustomed to travel or wholesale uprooting, to moves driven by work or safety or …
Portuguese authors collaborate on serial lockdown novel A group of major Portuguese authors have found a way to keep themselves and their readers busy during the lockdown: they’re writing a serial novel, wi …
Britney Spears: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Blackout (2007) “There’s only two types of people in the world,” Britney Spears sang on the title track of her 2008 album, Cir …
Simone de Beauvoir's 'too intimate' novel to be published after 75 years Summary: A novel by Simone de Beauvoir that was deemed too intimate to release in her lifetime will be published for the first time later this year. The French …
'They were forgotten': the great female cartoonists who have been overlooked The world of comic books, both on the page and off, is one that’s typically dominated by men. It’s an unavoidable gender skew yet what gets pushed to …
Free food and $100 prizes: Alaskans rally to get challenged classics to students A school board in Alaska has got more than it bargained for after pulling classics including The Great Gatsby and I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings from …
From wars to wages: how the word 'furlough' gained currency Thanks to the coronavirus job retention scheme, many employees have been “furloughed” on 80% of their salary during lockdown. Presumably this obscure …
Hollow in the Land by James Clarke review – hard lives in Lancashire Set against the 1984 miners’ strike, James Clarke’s first novel The Litten Path won the 2019 Betty Trask prize and made itself at home with poverty, l …
The See-Through House by Shelley Klein review – a father's obsession Summary: When Shelley Klein moved back in with her father Beri after her mother died, she brought some old furniture with her. He didn’t want it in the house: …
My favourite book as a kid: Trubloff by John Burningham The figures loom out of pitch black, heavy boots kicking up in thick smudges, hands roughly smeared above their heads as they dance to the music of th …
Maj Sjöwall obituary Summary: Widely regarded as the godmother of modern Scandinavian crime fiction, Maj Sjöwall, who has died aged 84, was the co-author of 10 detective stories fe …
Literary lockdown: how translating a Dan Brown novel made for a thriller plot In March 2013, Carole Delporte, a 37 year-old French translator, flew to Milan on a job for which she had been carefully screened, and finally selecte …
Schoenberg: Pelleas und Melisande; Erwartung review – dramatic extremes No two works in Schoenberg’s output better illustrate the scale of the musical journey he undertook in the first decade of the 20th century than Pelle …
Amazon to cut price of its ebooks to reflect removal of VAT Amazon has confirmed it will cut the price of its Kindle ebooks from Friday, after the government announced it would bring forward plans to stop charg …
Belle and Sebastian's lockdown listening: 'I have a dance-off with my kids every night' Belle and Sebastian were meant to go to the US to make a record when lockdown was announced, but, thankfully, we had enough time to cancel everything …
Double Lives by Helen McCarthy – a history of working mothers Three generations of working mothers. My grandmother, at home with 10 children between the wars, took in sailors’ washing to make ends meet. She had n …
Laura Jurd’s Dinosaur:  To the Earth review – eloquent and spirited Anybody accumulating evidence for the existence of old souls could do worse than check out the Hampshire-born trumpeter-composer Laura Jurd’s contribu …
I wish more people would read ... HG Wells's Mr Britling Sees It Through Last year I wrote a literary biography of HG Wells, a task that, of course, entailed reading all his novels. I already knew his science fiction and so …
Mahalia's lockdown listening: 'Quarantine has been difficult for my confidence' I had a couple of friends staying with me just before lockdown happened and we were like: “Let’s do it together”. Having my friends and partner with m …
The end of coronavirus: what plague literature tells us about our future Shortly before the London lockdown, at an eerily quiet branch of Waterstones, I managed to get my hands on The Decameron, by Boccaccio, and Daniel Def …
'It's DIY TV': Daniel Hope on performing to millions from his living room Summary: ‘You’d better unpack.” I was outside my home in Berlin in my car. I had just loaded it up and strapped the kids into their seats when my manager calle …
Tony Allen: the Afrobeat pioneer's 10 finest recordings Listen to a playlist of Ammar’s selections: Fela Kuti: Roforofo Fight (Roforofo Fight, 1972) Roforofo Fight is the earliest cohesive expression of Ton …
Letter: Tomie dePaola obituary Tomie dePaola was ahead of his time in terms of environmental awareness and gender roles. One of the loveliest picture books that I read to my now 40- …
Publishers must act now to develop working-class writers, says report The books industry needs to “wake up to the world beyond the M25”, according to a new report into the under-representation of British working-class wr …
Tony Allen: the Afrobeat maverick who blazed a trail across the globe Few musicians can claim to have invented a revolutionary rhythm, but then few are quite like the late Afrobeat pioneer Tony Allen. Brian Eno called hi …
The Glass Hotel by Emily St John Mandel review – haunted visions of a global crisis Few readers will come to Emily St John Mandel’s fifth novel, The Glass Hotel, unaware of her fourth, 2014’s Station Eleven, which imagined a world rav …
Normal People: the adaptation is sublime, like Sally Rooney's novel This week, I’ve watched half of the 12-part television adaptation of Normal People, and so this column is an appreciation of Sally Rooney. I remember …
Struggling to read, or write? How to be creative in lockdown Richard Osman: ‘Give yourself two hours today to sit and write’ So you’ve had the idea for a couple of years. Perhaps it is about the sexual awakening …
Sarah Perry: what good are books, in a situation like this? Summary: Some months ago I stood in the pulpit of Lancaster Priory and spoke on the virtue of art. What do we mean, I said, by “a good book”? I proposed that l …
Natural by Alan Levinovitz review – the seductive myth of nature's goodness Summary: The world was under lockdown and I was playing at being an outlaw. From the comfort of my sofa, I traversed alligator-infested swamps, skinned beavers …
NK Jemisin: 'It’s easier to get a book set in black Africa published if you're white' In 2018, NK Jemisin became the first writer ever to win three consecutive Hugo best novel awards for science fiction and fantasy. Her first award had …
Children’s books roundup – the best new picture books and novels Summary: Imaginary worlds, absorbing nonfiction and daft belly-laughs are hopefully providing some relief to frustrated kids during lockdown. In picture books, …
Ghostpoet: I Grow Tired But Dare Not Fall Asleep review – dark but defiant Summary: Ghostpoet – the brooding alias of south London-born Obaro Ejimiwe – is roughly a decade old this year. This dour bard has long been an artist ahead of …
One to watch: Baby Rose It’s unusual these days for a voice you haven’t heard before to cut like a thorn. That, however, is the immediacy of Baby Rose’s talent. The 25-year-o …
Tom Green Septet: Tipping Point review – seamless flow Summary: In the freelance world of British jazz, a band that manages to stay in existence long enough to record its second album is something of a rarity. But …
Perfume Genius: 'I'm constantly demanding a big feeling' Until recently, Mike Hadreas was not a particularly emotional person. That may come as a surprise to fans of Perfume Genius, the name under which he r …
Pandemic! by Slavoj Žižek; Where Is God in a Coronavirus World? by John Lennox – review Detained at home with time to write instant books, two septuagenarian sages here make very different attempts to wrest a meaning or moral from the cor …
Arguing with Zombies review: Paul Krugman trumps the Republicans The New York Times columnist Paul Krugman has four essential rules for successful punditry: Stay with the easy stuff Write in English Be honest about …
In brief: Enter the Aardvark; The Dutch House; Resistance – review Enter the Aardvark Jessica Anthony Doubleday, £12.99, pp192 What begins as a topical takedown of the American political system deepens into a hugely e …
'The police force desperately needs more black, brown and gay recruits' How important was it for you to write this book and have your story heard? It was crucial. It has been incredibly therapeutic and healing to write it. …
Car Seat Headrest: Making a Door Less Open review – Will Toledo in yet another guise There’s a strange psychological cross-pollination going on behind the mask that Will Toledo, the artist mostly known as Car Seat Headrest, sports on t …
Drake: Dark Lane Demo Tapes review – rap’s whingeing king hits a dead end In a world where the boundary between mixtapes and albums is becoming ever more blurred, the title of Drake’s latest album highlights its interstitial …
Tony Allen obituary On 12 and 13 March there were two concerts in the Church of Sound series at St James the Great Church in Clapton, east London. They were staged in the …
50 Cent on love, cash and bankruptcy: ‘When there are setbacks, there will be get-backs’ Curtis Jackson has downsized. The rapper/actor/businessman, better known as 50 Cent, used to live in a palace of a house formerly owned by Mike Tyson. …
Cleanness by Garth Greenwell review – interlinked stories of pain and desire Garth Greenwell’s 2016 debut novel What Belongs to You was a spare, spellbinding account of an American academic’s intense desire for a rent boy in po …
The Big Book Weekend: a literary festival in your own home Would Robert Webb really have ripped open his shirt to show me the scar from his recent open heart surgery had we been, as planned, in a room full of …
I wish more people would read ... Fup by Jim Dodge Jim Dodge first had the idea for his 1983 novella while out digging post-holes for a fence on his Californian ranch on a rainy day. As the holes fille …
The Well Gardened Mind by Sue Stuart-Smith; The Natural Health Service by Isabel Hardman – review Spring, in the days of lockdown, continues obliviously – and reminds us how we depend on the natural world. For anyone with the luck to have a garden, …
'His drums were singing, you know?' Tony Allen remembered by his collaborators Femi Koleoso My dad used to play Fela Kuti records to me – some of my earliest musical memories are those records playing in the car. Later on I wonde …
Poem of the week: The Chess Player by Howard Altmann The Chess Player They’ve left. They’ve all left. The pigeon feeders have left. The old men on the benches have left. The white-gloved ladies with the …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Summary: Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start with the great Barbara Pym. MachenBach …
The Kinks: where to start in their back catalogue Summary: The album to start with The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society (1968) When the Kinks’ abominable onstage behaviour caused the American F …
Roger Robinson's poems of Trinidad and London win Ondaatje prize Roger Robinson’s vision of Trinidad as a “portable paradise” of “white sands, green hills and fresh fish”, has won the British-Trinidadian poet the Ro …
With Midnight Sun, Twilight is back at the best possible time It requires a strange sort of skill to miss a phenomenon such as Twilight. The first instalment of Stephenie Meyer’s young adult series was published …
Colson Whitehead and This American Life among Pulitzer 2020 winners Colson Whitehead, This American Life and writers from the New York Times are among this year’s Pulitzer prize winners. During an online, at-home video …
My favourite book as a kid ... The Australian Women's Weekly Children’s Birthday Cake Book Like many children who fly through books at a pace that even the most encouraging parent finds infuriating, I often had to settle for whatever I could …
Rainbow Milk by Paul Mendez review – beautiful and distinctive A few years ago, I went to hear the great Ali Smith speak during a festival hosted by the National Centre for Writing in Norwich. Her talk was predict …
Techno DJ Kelly Lee Owens: ‘I still have to fight to not be seen as just the singer’ Kelly Lee Owens is showing me her crumpled bed, pixelated on the screen. It is five weeks into quarantine and this has quickly become the norm: an int …
Dave Greenfield: putting beauty at the rotten heart of the Stranglers Summary: Music writer Pete Paphides’ recent memoir, Broken Greek, contains a vivid description of its seven-year-old author encountering the Stranglers for the …
Defoe's Plague Year was written in 1722 but speaks clearly to our time Reading A Journal of the Plague Year, the first uneasy jolts of recognition come on page one. The narrator tells us that he and his neighbours heard t …
Lost Bob Dylan lyrics from Blonde on Blonde era go to auction A page of Bob Dylan’s manuscript featuring lyrics for Blonde on Blonde, regarded by many as his greatest ever album, is being auctioned by Sotheby’s i …
Hilary Bracefield obituary Summary: A true polymath, writing on a wide range of subjects from Stravinsky to the poetry of her fellow New Zealander Fleur Adcock, my friend and one-time co …
'A dream team': how the Hay festival will look online Ian McEwan once joked: “I don’t do research any more, I ask the audience at Hay.” The whole point of Hay festival is the celebratory pleasure of this …
Putin's People by Catherine Belton review – a groundbreaking study that follows the money Russia stepped decisively off a path of western-led global integration on the morning of 25 October 2003. Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the country’s richest …
'It's a tough island to live on': why coronavirus spells doom for Ibiza Ibiza welcomes more than three million visitors during the summer months, pumping billions into its economy. Close to 75% of the island’s 147,000-plus …
I wish more people would read ... Ducks, Newburyport by Lucy Ellmann There is a particular danger in enthusing over a big book. Namely, of becoming one of those people found on university campuses everywhere, who extol …
Friend by Paek Nam-nyong review – a bestseller from North Korea Exploring love, marriage and divorce, and later adapted for TV, Friend became a bestseller when it was published in 1988 in North Korea. It is now the …
Top 10 books about nursing Before Florence Nightingale, nursing was the domain of religious orders or women too disreputable to be domestic servants. The Crimean war, in 1854, w …
Millie Small, My Boy Lollipop singer, dies aged 73 Millie Small, the Jamaican singer known for her global 1964 hit My Boy Lollipop, has died aged 73. Island Records founder Chris Blackwell, who origina …
The Well Gardened Mind by Sue Stuart-Smith review – unwinding with nature Sue Stuart-Smith, a psychiatrist and psychotherapist, has a unique view of gardening: “I have come to understand that deep existential processes can b …
Laurie Anderson: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Big Science (1982) It was the 1981 breakout O Superman that flung multimedia artist Laurie Anderson to No 2 in the UK singles …
Martin Lovett obituary The cellist Martin Lovett, who has died aged 93 after contracting Covid-19, acted as the musical conscience of the Amadeus String Quartet. When the pl …
Leading writers take up 'darkness residencies' for art project Some of the UK’s most acclaimed authors, from the Folio prize-winning poet Raymond Antrobus to the Booker-winning novelist Bernardine Evaristo, have b …
'It's unnerving': Lawrence Wright on the eerie prescience of his pandemic novel The novel virus first emerged in east Asia. By spring, a pandemic suffuses the globe. In America, businesses shut down, airports empty, misinformation …
Florian Schneider, Kraftwerk co-founder, dies aged 73 Summary: Florian Schneider, who as one of the founding members of German group Kraftwerk changed the sound of pop music forever, has died aged 73 of cancer. Th …
Millie Small obituary With international sales of 5m copies in 1964, the year of its release, the hit single My Boy Lollipop, sung by Millie, who has died aged 72, “opened …
Briggs v Tim Minchin, Kit, Josh Pyke and others: Australia's best music for May Briggs and Tim Minchin – Housefyre For fans of: AB Original, Urthboy, Tism Isolation has led to many creative artistic collaborations over the past fe …
Florian Schneider: the enigma whose codes broke open pop music Summary: Florian Schneider’s death came shrouded in a degree of secrecy. Gossip among fans about his health was first provoked at the end of April, when his fe …
Sick Souls, Healthy Minds by John Kaag review – can William James save your life? From Plato to Heidegger, philosophers have taken a dim view of the common people. That, however, began to change when the common people turned into a …
The Hundred Years' War on Palestine by Rashid Khalidi review – conquest and resistance Summary: Rashid Khalidi’s account of Jewish settlers’ conquest of Palestine is informed and passionate. It pulls no punches in its critique of Jewish-Israeli p …
My favourite book as a kid ... Moominland Midwinter by Tove Jansson Summary: When I was a young child and couldn’t get to sleep, I would dare myself to open my favourite book. Tove Jansson’s Moominland Midwinter was not obvious …
Kehlani: It Was Good Until It Wasn't review – talent shines in pansexual soap opera By anyone’s standards, Kehlani Parrish has experienced a pretty tumultuous rise to fame. She pulled off the not-inconsiderable feat of emerging from a …
'We are living through the first economic crisis of the Anthropocene' Every April, Washington DC plays host to the spring meetings of the IMF and World Bank. But last month, IMF managing director Kristalina Georgieva add …
Beethoven, Brahms review - Sokolov finds radical Beethoven For over a decade now, the British government’s stringent visa requirements for visiting musicians from outside the EU have ensured that Grigory Sokol …
'Sacrifice': from animal slaughter to pandemic rhetoric Summary: When we remember those killed in war, as with the 75th anniversary of VE Day, it is common to remark on their “sacrifice”. More than 100 doctors and n …
Kraftwerk: their 30 greatest songs, ranked! 30. Expo 2000 (1999) Kraftwerk’s first new and original music since 1986, this single started as a commissioned jingle for the Hanover Expo 2000 world …
Notting Hill carnival 2020 cancelled due to coronavirus Notting Hill carnival, one of the biggest cultural events in the UK that attracts more than a million people each year, has been cancelled due to coro …
The sound of silence: visiting the library during lockdown Jorge Luis Borges always imagined paradise “will be a kind of library”. For New Yorkers under lockdown, the sounds of the New York Public Library – ru …
Brian Howe, hard rock singer who fronted Bad Company, dies aged 66 Brian Howe, the singer who fronted the British rock supergroup Bad Company for eight years, has died aged 66. He had a heart attack at his Florida hom …
Bridget Martyn obituary My friend, Bridget Martyn, who has died aged 84, after suffering from Alzheimer’s, was a renowned encyclopedist. She was senior editorial manager of O …
Harry Garuba obituary My mentor and friend Harry Olúdáre Garuba, who has died of leukaemia aged 61, was a poet and professor of English and African studies at the Universit …
Ty, Mercury prize-nominated UK rapper, dies aged 47 of coronavirus Ty, the acclaimed UK hip-hop star who was nominated for the Mercury prize for his album Upwards, has died aged 47 after contracting coronavirus. A fun …
'When a woman raps, she spitting!' Megan Thee Stallion, the hot girl taking over hip-hop Summary: Given that her lyrical prowess has made her one of the hottest rappers in the US, it’s hardly surprising that Megan Thee Stallion is good at anecdotes …
'We do what we want, for ourselves': why it's a golden age for women in rap Summary: Much like the rest of the music industry, hip-hop, rap and grime have traditionally been male-dominated spaces. Finally, though, things are changing. …
Burn by Patrick Ness review – a fire-breathing adventure In Patrick Ness’s latest novel, dragons exist, in all their fire-breathing glory. The initial setting is 1950s America, against the backdrop of the co …
Brian May taken to hospital after tearing buttock muscles while gardening Brian May has complained of “relentless pain” after he was taken to hospital following a gardening injury that tore muscles in his buttocks – and, whi …
I wish more people would read … A Scrap of Time by Ida Fink Every Friday, an email titled A Personal Anthology arrives in my inbox. It’s a subscription newsletter devised by the writer Jonathan Gibbs, who invit …
The Life and Times of Malcolm McLaren review – fallouts and fabulous disasters Summary: “To be bad is good, because to be good is simply boring,” the formidable Rose Corré Isaacs would tell her grandson, Malcolm McLaren, a mantra that he …
Blake Mills: Mutable Set review – an ethereal journey into pop's avant garde Blake Mills has picked up Grammy nominations for his production work on Laura Marling’s Semper Femina, John Legend’s Darkness and Light and Perfume Ge …
Place: Ecuador review – a wild night in Quito While most would name Colombia as the home of South America’s forward-thinking club scene, neighbouring Ecuador has quietly been carving out its own d …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Katy J Pearson, Cher Lloyd, the 1975 Katy J Pearson Take Back the Radio A softly psychedelic sashay into the first whispers of summer, Take Back the Radio is an addictive whoop of pure jo …
Kim Petras's lockdown listening: 'My fans have truly kept me sane' Isolation has definitely been a test, but I’m really lucky: I’m able to work on new music while quarantined with my best friends in Toluca Lake, Los A …
'I wanted something 100% pornographic and 100% high art': the joy of writing about sex There is a widely held belief, among English-language writers, that sex is impossible to write about well – or at least much harder to write about wel …
The Motion of the Body Through Space by Lionel Shriver review – the cult of fitness Lionel Shriver’s scabrously funny 15th novel presents a dyspeptic view of people in thrall to exercise. In 2013 Shriver’s own daily regime involved “1 …
Ty: a dextrous artist who wove threads of UK rap culture together Summary: The death of British rapper Ty, aged 47, to complications from coronavirus came as a shock because it had appeared he was on his way to recovery after …
Helen Garner: 'I may be an old woman, but I'm not done for yet' Why did they ask me for an essay about stopping writing? And why did I say yes? Did I tell someone I’d stopped? Have I stopped? I could, if I wanted t …
James Monroe review: a timely reminder of the Era of Good Feelings Why read a biography of James Monroe, the fifth American president? Not, for British readers, merely because Tim McGrath begins with the sacking of Wa …
The Celestial Hunter by Roberto Calasso review – the sacrificial society Adam and Eve left the Garden of Eden wearing animal skins to hide the shame of their human flesh. “The Lord God made clothing” from the skins “for Ada …
Toni Morrison's The Bluest Eye at 50: a novel that speaks to our times This week, amazingly, I read a book. Just the one, though – let’s not get excited. I suspect I was only able to do so because I wasn’t reading for ple …
Rutger Bregman: the Dutch historian who rocked Davos and unearthed the real Lord of the Flies Summary: For most authors, now is the very worst time to bring out a book. The shops are closed; the festival circuit has migrated to Zoom; there’s a plague to …
The best recent poetry collections – review Bhanu Kapil’s How to Wash a Heart (Pavilion, £9.99) responds with brilliant acuity to the prolonged stress of the immigrant experience. In an affectin …
Poem of the month: Primavera by Robin Robertson for Cait The Brimstone is back in the woken hills of Vallombrosa, passing the word from speedwell to violet wood anemone to celandine. I could walk to …
Arion: Voyage of a Slavic Soul review – rich lyricism from Natalya Romaniw Born in Swansea of Ukrainian descent, the outstanding young soprano Natalya Romaniw was singing – stunningly – the title role of Puccini’s Madam Butte …
One to watch: Jetta “You can be very creative using very little… I actually prefer having less to work with because that way you need to use more of your imagination,” th …
Hayley Williams: Petals for Armor review – one of the year's biggest revelations Maturity is an often derided concept in a youth-facing art form. But when Simmer, a song about repressed feminist rage buoyed by creepy electronics – …
Could a 12-year-old Australian-Chinese violinist be the next child prodigy? The classical music world is no stranger to young talent. The 19th century virtuoso Niccolò Paganini started playing aged seven, while Yehudi Menuhin …
Andre Harrell, founder of influential R&B label Uptown Records, dies aged 59 Andre Harrell, founder of the influential R&B and hip-hop label Uptown Records, has died. He was 59. The cause of Harrell’s death, which was announced …
What made 60s music giants so great? Jamming says Bob Dylan's son Bob Dylan’s son, the musician and performer Jakob Dylan, has urged young people to get together in person to make music in the future and not to rely …
Watkins Family Hour: Brother Sister review – a model of sibling harmony Summary: California’s Sean and Sara Watkins are akin to royalty in American folk circles, firstly as founding members of the hugely successful Nickel Creek, an …
Little Richard: an ultra-sexual force of anti-nature Little Richard’s Rip It Up entered the UK top 30, right at the bottom, in December 1956. It looked up at a chart that included Bill Haley and Elvis Pr …
Richard Ford: 'I didn't finish a book until I was 19' Richard Ford, 76, is a novelist whose particular feat has been to translate failure into literary success: he writes about human beings and their disa …
Little Richard, rock'n'roll pioneer, dies aged 87 Little Richard, one of the pioneers of the first wave of rock’n’roll, has died. He was 87. Richard, whose real name was Richard Penniman, was born in …
'He hit us like a bolt of lightning': stars pay tribute to Little Richard Among tributes to Little Richard, the rock’n’roll pioneer who died on Saturday aged 87, came praise for his songwriting, his musicianship, his audacio …
Not now, Bernard ... I'm on my iPhone: classic children's text reissued for digital era For the past 40 years it has been a warning to parents about the monstrous consequences of ignoring their children. Now new illustrations of the class …
Could lockdown herald an exciting new chapter for the book trade? On 18 March, Emma Corfield-Walters received the news that for the second year running, her shop, Book-ish, in Crickhowell in the Brecon Beacons, had l …
Moses Sumney: Græ Part Two review – introspective magic This second suite of songs completes Moses Sumney’s 20-track double album Græ, a tour de force about “the duelling forces” in oneself that places the …
Apropos of Nothing review – Woody Allen's times and misdemeanours Summary: Though I see what he was getting at, I don’t quite agree with Hilaire Belloc, who once wrote that just as omelettes are either admirable or intolerabl …
I Break Horses: Warnings review – more woozy synthscapes Having started out as a My Bloody Valentine-indebted shoegaze duo, I Break Horses had become a solo vehicle for Swedish singer-songwriter Maria Lindén …
Kehlani: It Was Good Until It Wasn't review – intimate second album Across her solo releases, Oakland, California artist Kehlani has channelled a nostalgic kind of poppy R&B. That the former America’s Got Talent star’s …
The best albums of 2020 so far Fiona Apple Fetch the Bolt Cutters Apple’s prettily meandering piano can at first seem benign, even whimsical, but this album – already being regarded …
Sing Backwards and Weep by Mark Lanegan review – eye-popping trip Summary: The annals of rock are littered with used needles and the damage they have done. Few drug enthusiasts can have sunk so low, however, as singer Mark La …
Musicians call for industry shake-up to protect artists during lockdown Two organisations that represent thousands of British musicians and songwriters will today launch a Keep Music Alive campaign calling for urgent chang …
From NHS memoirs to The Bell Jar: the best books about burnout We need our health service now more than ever. Coronavirus has come at a time when we thought there was no more stretch left in the NHS, but healthcar …
The Mermaid of Black Conch by Monique Roffey review – a fishy tale of doomed womanhood Set in a tiny Caribbean village in the 1970s, this charming yet clear-eyed romance begins with a fisherman, David, lazily awaiting his catch only to s …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 20, Carly Rae Jepsen – Call Me Maybe There are No 1 pop songs you hear everywhere you go and soon hope never to hear again; and then there are pop songs that, to quote the critic Robert C …
I wish more people would read ... The Diary of a Provincial Lady by EM Delafield Summary: November 7th. Plant the indoor bulbs. Just as I am in the middle of them, Lady Boxe calls. I say, untruthfully, how nice to see her, and beg her to si …
Grateful Dead: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with American Beauty (1970) It is easy for people unfamiliar with their music to dismiss the Grateful Dead as amorphous jamming for …
James Patterson joins Guns N’ Roses to write ... a sweet child’s book? Fresh from writing a thriller with Bill Clinton (The President Is Missing), James Patterson has found an even more unlikely collaborator: the band Gun …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. First, Hilary Mantel’s The Assassination of Margar …
How we made The Story of Tracy Beaker Jacqueline Wilson, author I’d been writing children’s books for a while, but they had mostly disappeared without a trace. One day, I saw an advert for …
Stanley Johnson lands book deal to republish virus thriller A long out-of-print novel about a deadly virus by Stanley Johnson, the father of UK prime minister Boris Johnson, is to be reissued this summer, two w …
Betty Wright obituary The singer and songwriter Betty Wright, who has died of cancer aged 66, occupied a significant position in African-American music across six decades, …
Sandrey Date obituary Summary: My friend Sandrey Date, who has died aged 76, spent his entire working life as a music librarian in Bournemouth, from which base he was a bedrock of t …
Opera and classical concerts to watch at home: our critics' picks – week eight Schreker: Der Schmied von Gent This Opera Ballet Vlaanderen extravanganza is Bruegel gone psychedelic. Staged at the opera house in Ghent, where the o …
'Glimmer of hope': leading performers return to London's Wigmore Hall The BBC and the Wigmore Hall on Tuesday announced a concert series that will see leading musicians return to the London stage for the first time since …
Humankind: A Hopeful History by Rutger Bregman review – a tribute to our better nature Although one of the most contested concepts in political philosophy, human nature is something on which most people seem to agree. By and large, accor …
Poetry book of the month: Tongues of Fire by Seán Hewitt – review It is extraordinary to encounter a debut collection that feels as established as Seán Hewitt’s – and not in a willed or derivative way. These unmediat …
‘I’m genuine – and a bit strange’: emo rapper Yung Lean bares his soul It is a bright April afternoon, and Yung Lean is strolling down a Stockholm street, iPhone aloft. The rapper – real name Jonatan Leandoer Håstad – is …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 19, Lil Nas X – Old Town Road In 2011, NPR estimated that it cost around $78,000 (£61,600) to make a chart hit – and that was without a video or promotion. Nearly a decade later, w …
Coronavirus: Bryan Adams attacks China as 'bat eating, virus making' source Bryan Adams has made an expletive-filled attack on Chinese people over coronavirus, in the week he was due to start a concert residency at the Royal A …
A Journal of the Plague Year may be fictional, but it's not untrue Before we even began reading A Journal of the Plague Year together, it felt like an obvious choice as we try to find our way through this pandemic. Th …
British Library asks nation's children to write miniature books in lockdown Two hundred years ago, the Brontë children stitched together brown paper sugar packets, strips of wallpaper and old writing paper to create postage st …
Haruki Murakami to host lockdown radio show in Japan Summary: Much-acclaimed Japanes novelist Haruki Murakami will host a radio special next week to try to lift the nation’s spirits under the coronavirus lockdown …
'My studio is an extra limb right now': bedroom pop, the perfect genre for lockdown ‘I’m famous for staying in,” says R Stevie Moore, writer of the new wave number I Like to Stay Home. “So quarantine is no big deal.” But as a counterc …
Too black, too queer, too holy: why Little Richard never truly got his dues As the world marks and mourns the passing of Little Richard, many have been asking: how was someone so unapologetically black and queer present at the …
Reading and Leeds festival cancelled due to coronavirus Reading and Leeds festival, the two-city weekender that is one of the UK’s biggest outdoor events, has been cancelled due to the coronavirus crisis. O …
Bryan Adams apologises after 'bat eating' coronavirus rant The Canadian singer-songwriter Bryan Adams has apologised after an outburst on Instagram where he attacked “bat eating, wet market animal selling, vir …
UK live music and festival sector at risk of collapse due to coronavirus The British independent festival sector is at risk of collapsing, with many cancelled events falling through the cracks of government support measures …
Bluey: The Beach named book of the year at Australian Book Industry awards Bluey, the Emmy-winning Australian children’s television series about a little blue heeler puppy and her family, has just added another award to its s …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 18, Ian Dury and the Blockheads – Hit Me With Your Rhythm Stick With its distinctive 16-notes-to-the-bar bassline and unashamedly honky sax solo (played on two saxes at once), Ian Dury and the Blockheads’ signature …
I wish more people would read ... Under the Pendulum Sun by Jeannette Ng The elevator pitch can be difficult for any book, but perhaps even more so for fantasy novels. It’s a significant challenge to boil down strange new w …
French serial-killer expert admits serial lies, including murder of imaginary wife Summary: An online investigation has exposed French author Stéphane Bourgoin, whose books about serial killers have sold millions of copies in France, as a ser …
Kate Bush: where to start in her back catalogue Summary: The album to start with The Dreaming (1982) When Big Boi from Outkast said that The Dreaming, the worst performing of Kate Bush’s 10 studio albums, wa …
Top 10 books about Iran Iran is an ancient country with a complex people, among them some of the greatest poets who ever lived. Sadly, the Iranian novel has yet to reach the …
Sally Rooney's Normal People tops UK book charts as readers fall for TV version Summary: Sally Rooney’s Normal People has flown to the top of the UK’s book charts more than two years after it was published, thanks to the release of the TV …
What Comes After Farce? by Hal Foster review – oppositional art in the age of Trump During the mid-1980s, when Hal Foster established himself as one of the leading art critics in the anglophone world, many were flummoxed by his optimi …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 17, Kylie Minogue – Can't Get You Out of My Head Summary: Last month, Kylie Minogue shared on Instagram a viral video of a dog, eyes closed in blissful repose, nodding along to its favourite song. The tune in …
'It's a real battle': African authors fight for publishing independence When Cameroonian author Daniel Alain Nsegbe first saw his debut novel for sale in his home city of Douala, the price was so high “you would have to as …
Amy Winehouse's stilettos in Island Records auction for coronavirus A pair of stilettos worn by Amy Winehouse and handwritten lyrics by Bono are among the most eye-catching items in an auction being run by Island Recor …
Perfume Genius: Set My Heart on Fire Immediately review – pop poet discovers new powers Ignoring for a moment the well-established dangers of judging a book by its cover, it feels like you can divine a lot from the sleeve of Perfume Geniu …
John Cowley obituary In 1971 my husband, John Cowley, who has died aged 89, became deputy librarian at Hatfield Polytechnic (now Hertfordshire University), which had a new …
Peter Davies obituary Peter Davies, my colleague and friend, who has died aged 92, was Britain’s foremost scholar of the international shipping industry. His published outp …
'Ramping up': the go-to jargon for politicians in this pandemic Everything has been “ramping up” lately: the capacity for virus testing, the readiness to reopen workplaces, and so forth. But why ramping? We are sur …
Nicola Benedetti: Elgar Violin Concerto review – full-throttle, sinuous, subtle and electric The violin was Edward Elgar’s instrument, and when he was composing he thought as a string player: you can hear the idiomatic shaping of lines, the re …
Bryan Washington's 'kickass' short stories win £30,000 Dylan Thomas prize Bryan Washington, a 27-year-old writer from Houston, has won the £30,000 Swansea University International Dylan Thomas prize for his “kickass” debut s …
Coronavirus has left small publishers desperately fighting for survival Over the past few years, the success of independent publishers such as Fitzcarraldo, And Other Stories, Bluemooose and Influx Press has been something …
Miraa May's lockdown listening: 'I’m about to be a mum, but I won't lose my edge' Summary: I’m having a baby boy any day now, so I’m quarantining in London with my partner. Being a pregnant woman working in the music industry and not quite b …
Tazmamart by Aziz BineBine review – life in a secret prison In July 1971 military leaders launched a coup against Morocco’s King Hassan II, descending on his summer palace in Skhirat, where he was hosting a sum …
Witch 'n' Monk: Witch 'n' Monk review – Latin flautist and punk soprano make discordant, unearthly joy Summary: Witch ‘n’ Monk are a theatrical Anglo-Colombian duet featuring two very different musicians. Mauricio Velasierra plays a variety of flutes, while Heid …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 16, Beyoncé – Crazy in Love Crazy in Love rewrote pop history the moment it landed. Beyoncé’s 2003 smash hit is widely considered her debut solo single – eclipsing its largely fo …
Moby: All Visible Objects review – misjudged and out of touch Moby’s heydays bookended the 1990s. In 1991, the New York native smooshed together post-punk, 80s disco and the Twin Peaks score into Go, a quintessen …
Living-room disco: five of the best dance music mixes Summary: Bicep: Ambient Mix Hosted by the independent radio station NTS as part of its recent Remote Utopias festival, the Northern Irish dance duo take the BP …
What if Hillary had become president? Curtis Sittenfeld on rewriting Clinton's life Even now, I’m one of those people who can’t bring herself to say: “If Hillary Clinton had won the 2016 election … ” Because, to me, she did win. She r …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Big Thief, Razorlight, Arca Big Thief Love in Mine For a group whose entire pitch is just “the Band, but in 2020”, Big Thief have an uncanny knack for poleaxing you in the tender …
Phil May, frontman with the Pretty Things, dies aged 75 Phil May, frontman of riotous band the Pretty Things who were acclaimed peers of David Bowie and the Rolling Stones, has died aged 75. He died in hosp …
Research finds reading books has surged in lockdown A new survey has revealed that people in the UK have almost doubled the amount of time they spend reading books since lockdown began, but instead of d …
Beatles photographer Astrid Kirchherr dies aged 81 Astrid Kirchherr, the photographer whose shots of the Beatles helped turn them into icons, has died aged 81. The Beatles writer Mark Lewisohn confirme …
Alan Williams obituary In Michael Frayn’s Fleet Street novel, Towards the End of the Morning, a smartarse graduate trainee scandalises a bunch of beery hacks by asking for a …
A Theatre for Dreamers by Polly Samson review – free love with Leonard Cohen It’s the spring of 1960, and 18-year-old Erica has come to the tiny Greek island of Hydra with her boyfriend Jimmy, a would-be painter-poet, to join i …
The Great British Battle: how the fight against coronavirus spread a new nationalism For about five weeks, the mayhem of coronavirus rendered the political mayhem of the previous four years irrelevant and dated. The divisive, petty, me …
The Eighth by Stephen Johnson review – Mahler and sexual creativity Stephen Johnson ends this thrilling study of Gustav Mahler’s Symphony No 8, and much else besides, with a quotation attributed to Beethoven, of which …
Phil May of the Pretty Things: agent of chaos who fought the laws of pop Two years ago, I interviewed Phil May and Dick Taylor of the Pretty Things in the restaurant of a London hotel. Before the pair arrived, I sat chattin …
Natural talent: the 16 year-old writer taking the world by storm It is a challenging time to be 16 and, like his peers, Dara McAnulty must currently endure a form of house arrest that means no seeing friends, no GCS …
British Violin Sonatas Vol 3 review – Tasmin Little bows out in style After a career of three decades, the star violinist Tasmin Little may have had her farewell concert season thwarted – at least for now. Yet this final …
One to watch: Pinty Summary: For a while now, Peckham has been a hotbed of heads playing jazz-tinged house in converted pool rooms and straight-up jazz in the backrooms of boozers …
The new queen bee: Rihanna is crowned Britain's wealthiest female musician Rihanna was a tiny child when she first walked in on her father smoking crack. The family struggled with poverty during her childhood in Barbados; her …
Daniel Mason: ‘I really don't want to write about my patients’ Daniel Mason is the author of three acclaimed novels: The Piano Tuner, A Far Country and The Winter Soldier. He is also a practising psychiatrist and …
Megan Washington, Tkay Maidza, Steve Smyth and more: Australian music for isolated times We’ve published a bunch of articles about how the coronavirus crisis has impacted the Australian arts industry – and musicians, being asked to play fo …
Inferno; What Have I Done? – fearless accounts of postpartum psychosis Postpartum psychosis affects approximately one in 1,000 new mothers, but is still rarely discussed; perhaps, as Laura Dockrill suggests in her memoir, …
KSI: ‘Money gravitates towards me’ Summary: During the past couple of months, the internet star KSI has been prolific on YouTube, because what else has there been to do? He has asked subscribers …
Whodunnit? Did Agatha Christie ‘borrow’ the plot for acclaimed novel? The striking plot of one of Agatha Christie’s best-known mysteries, The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, surprises each new generation of readers. But now the …
Burgess papers reveal alternatives to notorious Earthly Powers ‘catamite’ opening For four decades, children have sniggered at the first line of the Anthony Burgess novel Earthly Powers, regarded as the most deliberately provocative …
The Caravan: Abdallah Azzam and the Rise of Global Jihad review – recent history at its finest Abdallah Azzam is not exactly a household name – at least when compared with the far more notorious Osama bin Laden. But the militant Palestinian cler …
Mark Lanegan: Straight Songs of Sorrow review – reflections on a misspent youth Mark Lanegan’s traumatic memoir, Sing Backwards and Weep, just published, recounts the Pacific Northwest singer’s deep dive into addiction, wrongdoing …
Barn 8 by Deb Olin Unferth review – riotous chicken rescue The inspiration behind the new novel from the American writer Deb Olin Unferth lies in a sobering investigation she wrote for Harper’s magazine six ye …
Sleaford Mods: All That Glue review – scattergun fury Unlike most of their chart peers, Sleaford Mods’ route to success has been a slow one, the Nottingham duo gathering momentum since their 2007 debut al …
Don Vappie & Jazz Créole: The Blue Book of Storyville review – delicate rhythm and banjo An easy-going singer, virtuoso of the banjo and larger-than-life character, Don Vappie is as New Orleans as they come. His mixed-race Creole ancestors …
Phil May obituary As the singer and chief songwriter of the Pretty Things, Phil May, who has died aged 75 from complications following hip surgery after a cycling accid …
'They'd greet us with fire extinguishers!': the wild times of Blixa Bargeld ‘The fire got a bit out of control,” says Blixa Bargeld, recalling a gig his band played in 1986. As Einstürzende Neubauten, which means Collapsing Ne …
Negative Capability by Michèle Roberts review – the novelist's wisdom casts a spell It’s hard to write about rejection; perhaps it’s the hardest thing of all. Who wants to revisit such pain? Who really cares to crack open the smooth s …
Heroes, runners and riders: sports books to get your heart racing In these times of containment and claustrophobia – with stadiums empty, pitches silent and TV cameras unplugged – sports books are one way to fill the …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 15, Jerry Lee Lewis – Great Balls of Fire The revolutionary force of rock’n’roll’s first wave echoed down the years because it broke racial taboos, mixing black and white music, black and whit …
How to write 1,000 poems in 1,000 days For the past 1,000 days, I’ve been writing at least one poem a day. I started on 17 August 2017 as a terrorist attack was unfolding in Barcelona. I wa …
Poem of the week: Ambala by Shanta Acharya Ambala She burst into my room dancing, humming, a force of nature, her dark skin gleaming, cleaving me with her beauty’s pulse. I sat face-masked, hal …
Bob Marley: where to start in his back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Exodus (1977) Picking a top Bob Marley and the Wailers LP is tough. The revelatory arc his albums form over the two-plus decad …
Taika Waititi leads all-star charity Roald Dahl readings Chris and Liam Hemsworth, Ryan Reynolds, Meryl Streep and Benedict Cumberbatch are among stars taking part in a group reading of Roald Dahl’s beloved …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. “Now, here is someone who can write,” says Larts. …
Waterstones plans to put its books under a 72-hour quarantine Waterstones is preparing to put books into quarantine after they have been handled by browsing shoppers as part of plans to reopen its stores when all …
Rodham by Curtis Sittenfeld review – where would Hillary be without Bill Clinton? Love is the great accident. We can fall for the wrong person, or we can have the great good fortune to attach ourselves to the right person, and the s …
'Misery gives us strength': Soolking, the rap voice of young Algeria Thirty-year-old Algerian rapper Soolking was just hitting his stride before the world was put on lockdown. His commercially appealing blend of pop, re …
The Residue Years by Mitchell S Jackson review – a tale of mourning and loss Summary: Black people and white people in the US, segregated in cities after policies in the 1930s mandated that social housing projects should be built separa …
Bad Bunny: does a straight man deserve to be called a 'queer icon'? In 2020, when definitions of sexuality and gender are undergoing major changes, can a straight man be a queer icon? Yes, according to a glowing cover …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup Summary: Camino Winds John Grisham Hodder & Stoughton, £20, pp304 There is something very soothing about Camino Winds, despite the fact it deals with more than …
The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes review – a sleek Hunger Games prequel Suzanne Collins’s bestselling dystopian Hunger Games trilogy is set in a future America, Panem, whose capital city Capitol extorts a terrible annual t …
The Adventures of China Iron review – a thrilling miniature epic Summary: The gaucho Martín Fierro, the creation of poet José Hernández, is one of the great figures of Argentinian literature: a singer who relates the camarad …
Top 10 books about silence Silence in a book is a funny old thing. Too much of it and the reader may well want their money back. Too little and what’s left of suspense, mystery, …
Sing Backwards and Weep by Mark Lanegan review – touring, recording, drugs In 1992, on a tour bus heading to Canada, the American singer Mark Lanegan felt a tightness in the crook of his arm. By the time he reached Quebec, hi …
'Film is just one way to tell a story': Duncan Jones on his comic book sequel to Moon When film-maker Duncan Jones decided to tell the third story in his tangentially linked science fiction trilogy, following Moon (2009) and the 2018 Ne …
Gabriel Bacquier obituary Summary: One of the finest French baritones of the second half of the 20th century, Gabriel Bacquier has died aged 95. Though by no means confined to the Frenc …
The Australian book you've finally got time for: On the Beach by Nevil Shute Summary: I often wonder how many people bought On the Beach when it came out in 1957, assuming it was a novel about a group of gorgeous, sun-kissed surfers cat …
Mussolini's War by John Gooch review – fascist dreams of the 1930s and 40s Summary: After the end of the second world war, several of Mussolini’s generals said that they believed that Il Duce had been “mad for four years”. Others clai …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 12, Sinéad O'Connor – Nothing Compares 2 U It’s been 30 years and 142 days since Sinéad O’Connor scaled the charts with Nothing Compares 2 U, her only Top 10 hit. It wasn’t the only anomalous t …
Lana Del Rey hits back at critics who say she 'glamorises abuse' Summary: Lana Del Rey has hit out at the accusations that she “glamorises abuse” that have trailed her throughout her decade-long career. In a lengthy text pos …
Orwell prize for fiction shortlist replays 2019 Booker prize contest The clash between Bernardine Evaristo’s Girl, Woman, Other and Lucy Ellmann’s Ducks, Newburyport for last year’s Booker prize is set for a replay afte …
Franck: Le Chasseur Maudit; Psyché; Les Éolides review – vivid symphonic poems to rekindle a reputation Though he was born in Belgium, César Franck was based in Paris for almost all of his adult life. His pupils included Duparc, Chausson and d’Indy, whil …
Bill Clinton writing second thriller with James Patterson Bill Clinton is set to publish his second thriller, a crime novel which follows a former US president whose daughter is kidnapped. Clinton, whose own …
‘Spotify's tip jar is offensive to artists and consumers’: stars on pop’s future after coronavirus Summary: Like many other aspects of life, the music industry has been changed, possibly permanently, by the coronavirus pandemic. There have been predictions o …
Pew by Catherine Lacey review – a foreboding fable Catherine Lacey’s puzzle of a novel begins with its main character waking up in an American church during Sunday morning service, unwilling to speak a …
Jake Blount: Spider Tales review - instant classic reinstates folk's black, queer roots Jake Blount is a brilliant banjoist, fiddle player and singer based in Rhode Island in the US, his fingering thrilling and pacy, his voice charismatic …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 11, The Beach Boys – Good Vibrations Few pop songs are as revered for their technical prowess as this post-Pet Sounds October 1966 release by the Beach Boys. With lyrics by Mike Love and …
Brown Album by Porochista Khakpour review – a question of self-discovery Of the many tens of thousands of Iranians who emigrated to the west after the 1979 revolution, the majority settled in California. Among them were Por …
Look, don't touch: what great literature can teach us about love with no contact In our time of social distancing, the desire for physical contact has never been so intense. And yet we are untouchable. This experience has had its m …
The best recent crime and thrillers – review roundup Lucy Atkins’s fourth novel, Magpie Lane (Quercus, £16.99), begins with a middle-aged nanny being questioned by police about the disappearance of her e …
Carly Rae Jepsen's lockdown listening: 'My fridge caught on fire!' I’m in sunny Los Angeles, quarantined solo with my cat. It’s been intense for a lot of different reasons. My fridge caught on fire. I didn’t know frid …
Scottish national poet Jackie Kay talks about racism she endured as a child One of Scotland’s most garlanded poets, Jackie Kay, has spoken out about the racist bullying she experienced as a child in the 1970s. Kay, who is Scot …
Gloria Steinem says TV drama of 1970s feminist history ‘ridiculous' It stars Cate Blanchett and Rose Byrne in a glossy, big-budget TV account of 1970s feminist history but one key player who was there, Gloria Steinem, …
Mory Kanté: Guinean musician dies aged 70 from chronic health problems The Guinean musician Mory Kanté has died aged 70. His son Balla Kanté told the AFP news agency that his death was the result of untreated chronic heal …
Romance Writers of America aims for happy end to racism row with new prize Romance Writers of America is attempting to turn the page on a damaging racism row, abolishing its top literary prizes and replacing them with awards …
Alaskan school board lifts ban on Gatsby and Catch-22 after protests Classic novels including The Great Gatsby and Catch-22 have been returned to the curriculum in Palmer, Alaska, after a widespread community protest ag …
Paschal Allen obituary My friend Paschal Allen, who has died aged 87 from Covid-19, was an opera singer who spent 15 years at the Royal Opera House, toured extensively acros …
Peace Talks by Tim Finch review – a moving study of love and loss One of the striking things about Tim Finch’s 2013 first novel, The House of Journalists, was the degree to which his characters colluded in what was u …
Author Michael Rosen out of intensive care after 47 days Summary: The poet, broadcaster and author Michael Rosen has left intensive care 47 days after he was admitted. Rosen, 74, the author of children’s books includ …
Cyrillus Kreek: The Suspended Harp of Babel review – music of another place and time The 15-strong Estonian choir Vox Clamantis, conspicuously full-toned and subtly expressive, is perhaps best known for singing music by their fellow co …
Robin Wall Kimmerer: 'People can’t understand the world as a gift unless someone shows them how' “This is a time to take a lesson from mosses,” says Robin Wall Kimmerer, celebrated writer and botanist. Her first book, published in 2003, was the na …
The English towers and landmarks that inspired Tolkien's hobbit sagas Readers of The Lord of the Rings must surely imagine lifting their eyes in terror before Saruman’s dark tower, known as Orthanc. Over the years, many …
One to watch: Tiana Major9 Summary: Tiana Major9 has a voice that is potent in its rich, unfaltering nature. Born and raised in Newham, east London, in a Jamaican household, she grew up …
The 1975: Notes on a Conditional Form review – an uncertain record for uncertain times The 1975’s Notes on a Conditional Form is an album that thanks you not to classify it. Long delayed, running at roughly 80 minutes and featuring cameo …
Steve Earle and the Dukes: Ghosts of West Virginia review – testimony to a coal-mining tragedy A longstanding supporter of green and leftwing causes, Steve Earle describes his 20th studio album as “a record that speaks to and for people who didn …
Barton Gellman: ‘The Assange precedent is dangerous’ Barton Gellman is an investigative journalist celebrated for his reports on 9/11, former US vice-president Dick Cheney and the surveillance state. He …
From Justin Bieber to Haim: how seven top artists made video clips in lockdown New Zealand band the Beths are getting ready to release their second album in June. It’s kind of a weird time to do it. “It’s pretty strange, it feels …
Powderfinger One Night Lonely review – first show in a decade a poignant reminder of what we've lost There were many poignant moments watching Powderfinger streaming their first show in a decade on Saturday night, but the biggest one was seeing bassis …
Lockdown playlists for every mood, part one: chosen by Jarvis Cocker, Haim and Lianne La Havas Jarvis Cocker’s uplifting playlist … for raising the spirits Cocker and his partner, Kim, have been keeping their spirits up during lockdown by doing …
KSI: Dissimulation review – a pugnacious debut Dissimulation is the pugnacious solo debut LP of UK rapper KSI. Straight outta Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, Olajide Olatunji first found renown as a Yo …
Igor Levit: 'These concerts were life-saving for me' The Russian-born, German-based superstar pianist Igor Levit, 33, is renowned for the fearlessness and intensity of his playing, and for his zest for t …
Lockdown playlists for every mood, part two: chosen by Norah Jones, Joe Talbot and Flohio Norah Jones’s peaceful playlist … for a calm start to the day In lockdown in New York, Norah Jones and her husband, Pete, have started a new musical t …
Wild Child review – notes from the landscape of childhood One of my favourite essays is a piece by Michael Chabon called The Wilderness of Childhood. It’s about how children’s imaginations – and the books the …
'Like a tap being turned off': music magazines fight for survival in UK As the nation locked down in March, the staff of Loud and Quiet magazine knew they were in trouble. No gigs or festivals for the foreseeable future di …
Tim Burgess: I Love the New Sky review – unabashedly uplifting Summary: A chameleon of the times, Charlatans frontman Tim Burgess has manoeuvred smooth transitions from baggy psychedelicist to pugnacious belter of Britpop …
Lockdown playlists for every mood, part three: chosen by Bat for Lashes, Neil Tennant, Jason Williamson and Mike Skinner Bat for Lashes’s optimistic playlist … for bringing positive vibes At her home of three years in Los Angeles, Natasha Khan and her boyfriend are havin …
Sydney Opera House's livestreamed concert series could be a game-changer for local bands Vivid festival was due to light up Sydney on Friday but instead the city is dark and silent bar a few night-joggers ploughing the streets. There’s a s …
Courtney Love in Liverpool: the Scousers who taught the grunge icon how to rock If you were in Liverpool in 1982 and had a habit of wandering down Mathew Street, perhaps on your way to Probe record store, you are likely to have se …
The Consequences of Love by Gavanndra Hodge review – blighted past of a Chelsea girl To the outside eye, Gavanndra Hodge’s childhood must have seemed impossibly glamorous. Her father, the celebrity hairdresser Gavin Hodge, was a man ab …
Chart toppers: the best books to help you understand numbers It’s hard to imagine a moment in history more driven by numbers. Suddenly we’re all poring over reams of data, while debates over the merits of mathem …
From Germany to Detroit and back: how Kraftwerk forged an industrial exchange When the death of Kraftwerk co-founder Florian Schneider was announced last week, the loudest tributes came from the electronic music community. Kraft …
Amora by Natalia Borges Polesso review – stories of love between women Finding it hard to concentrate? Progress on that doorstep novel you promised you’d read when you had the chance not going so well? You could do worse …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 10, Marvin Gaye – I Heard It Through the Grapevine It can be hard to grasp the depth and breadth of Marvin Gaye’s career. He seems to have lived one of those kaleidoscopic lives that could only have oc …
Poem of the week: Godhuli Time by Srinivas Rayaprol Godhuli Time It is the cow-dust hour And smoke lies heavy over my head As I walk across these earthen paths And smells of burnt milk from inside Mingl …
Sonic Youth: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with Daydream Nation (1988) One of indie rock’s truly sacred texts, Daydream Nation is both a gripping synthesis of the punk, colle …
House music:  classical critics' watching and listening picks My corona-listening is a mix of random v planned. Switching on BBC Radio 3, but missing the beginning of a piece, is one kind of random. The fabulous …
Mory Kanté obituary Mory Kanté, who has died aged 70 from untreated health problems, was a singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist and one of west Africa’s most versati …
Jimmy Cobb, drummer on Miles Davis's Kind of Blue, dies aged 91 Jimmy Cobb, the jazz drummer and last surviving player on Miles Davis’s seminal 1959 album Kind of Blue has died from lung cancer at age 91. Cobb was …
'I will kill you if you give this song to anyone but me': how Peggy Lee was perfect for Is That All There Is? In September 1968, songwriting titans Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller were on the hunt for a singer for their curious new composition Is That All There …
A Woman by Sibilla Aleramo review – groundbreaking In 1906 in England, literature was dominated by the well-behaved worlds of novelists such as Arnold Bennett, EM Forster and John Galsworthy. At the sa …
Pew by Catherine Lacey review – when silence speaks volumes Summary: Pitched somewhere between Shirley Jackson’s creepy small-town horror and the seminar-room riddling of JM Coetzee, Catherine Lacey’s powerful new novel …
Bobby Digital: Jamaican reggae producer dies aged 59 Renowned Jamaican record producer Robert “Bobby Digital” Dixon died in a Kingston hospital on 21 May, aged 59. The cause of death was kidney disease. …
David Bowie, Adele and Beyoncé: BBC unveils Glastonbury coverage The final weekend of June should have seen 200,000 revellers descend on Somerset for the 50th anniversary of the Glastonbury festival. With the event …
'Milli Violini': I was a fake violinist in a world-class miming orchestra A young violinist joins an award-winning ensemble led by a famous composer, only to find out that all of the musicians aren’t actually playing their i …
Dark Mirror by Barton Gellman review – the rise of today's surveillance state In January 2013, the documentary film-maker Laura Poitras asked Barton Gellman if he wanted to grab a coffee. The venue was New York. Poitras told Gel …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 8, The Prodigy – Firestarter It starts with a riff: not a distorted guitar but a contorted squeal from a twisted fairground. It’s a riff nonetheless, the instantly sticky sign of …
Add some township jive! How London's jazz scene set itself apart Although its live scene is currently on pause, jazz has been thriving throughout London, with names such as Shabaka Hutchings, Nubya Garcia and Binker …
Forced Out by Kevin Maxwell review – prejudice between police Summary: Black people’s antipathy towards the police in the UK starts at a young age, from the moment officers transform themselves from protectors to oppresso …
Spike Island at 30: the Stone Roses gig was scary, shambolic – and pure bliss History tells me that the Stone Roses at Spike Island was, in musical terms, awful: the band seemed bored, the sound was weak. Here were 27,000 people …
The Australian book you've finally got time to read: Sentenced to Life by Clive James Walking home recently under grey skies, I stopped to watch the afternoon light fail. I could have looked at my phone for comfort, but I found myself i …
The Proms to go ahead this summer, but 'not as we know them' There will be Prom concerts this summer but not as we know them and, given there may well be no live audiences and no full orchestras, they are the gr …
The Proms needs its audience just as we need the Proms I first went to a Proms concert as a teenager. Just as one does still today, I joined the queue that snakes around the outside of the Albert Hall, bou …
Out of My Skull by James Danckert and John D Eastwood – the psychology of boredom ﻿According to the great proto-existentialist philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, the life of a human or other beast “swings like a pendulum back and fort …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 7, The Human League – Don't You Want Me Sometimes you can’t quite trust artists to tell the truth about their best work. Speaking to Smash Hits around the time of Don’t You Want Me’s release …
David Attenborough to publish 'witness statement' on climate crisis Summary: David Attenborough is to publish his “vision for the future” of Earth this autumn, laying out “the dreadful damage” done by humanity, and the ways “we …
Strauss: Die Frau ohne Schatten review – outstanding account of a demanding, dramatic masterpiece Die Frau ohne Schatten, The Woman Without a Shadow, may be the piece that marks out the real Richard Strauss fans from the mere admirers. To fully pai …
'Social distancing': how a 1950s phrase came to dominate 2020 As schools prepare to reopen, many wonder how small children are expected to maintain “social distancing”. Some French teachers have been isolating th …
Pills, mills and bellyaches: how Blackburn out-partied Manchester In 1987, Nigel Gilmartin was working as a mobile DJ in Blackburn: weddings, engagements and birthdays at community halls; the shirt-and-tie scene at w …
'Why did white men get to have all the fun?': the long road to diverse travel writing I was born in London, to Indian parents who grew up in apartheid-era South Africa. When I was seven we left Wimbledon for a tiny village in the Lauren …
Andy Gill: Gang of Four to release guitarist's final recordings The influential post-punk band Gang of Four are to release the final recordings featuring the group’s influential guitarist and songwriter Andy Gill, …
Jimmy Cobb obituary There are sublime moments in music that only the cognoscenti notice, plenty that millions love, and some that many sense without quite knowing why. Ki …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 6, Michael Jackson – Billie Jean Billie Jean is not cancelled. Whatever personal arrangement you may have come to regarding the life and music of Michael Jackson, the culture at large …
Whit Dickey Trio: Expanding Light review – pin-sharp free jazz finds new heat Summary: A post-Coltrane coterie of American free jazz players, including the late sax radical David S Ware and eclectic composer/bassist William Parker, have …
Clothes … and Other Things that Matter by Alexandra Shulman review – a charming memoir Summary: Alexandra Shulman’s introduction to her charming memoir opens with an inventory of her wardrobe. It is a disarming tactic, as if to say: “See, I have …
Sophie Ellis-Bextor's lockdown listening: 'A child could understand it – stay at home' Summary: Time alone has been in short supply. In the mornings, when I get up with Mickey, my youngest, we’ve been watching Grayson Perry’s Art Club and Celebri …
Mark Haddon: 'The only books I wish I’d written are better versions of my own' The book I am currently reading Homie by Danez Smith, Rusty Brown by Chris Ware and Ice by Anna Kavan, to name only the top three on the pile. The boo …
Westerman: ‘Music is an incredibly helpful thing to have in difficult times’ The last cliche anyone needs to hear more of now is how the music that’s coming out is “perfect for these unprecedented times”. But what we do need ar …
Lady Gaga: Chromatica review – Gaga rediscovers the riot on her most personal album A criticism often levelled at Lady Gaga is that the fantastical imagery she constructs around her albums eclipses the music itself. But it’s a sliding …
'Gross incompetence at highest levels': ex-Obama adviser blasts Trump's Covid response The US has shown “gross incompetence … at the highest levels” in dealing with the Covid-19 pandemic, according to Samantha Power, who served as US amb …
Kate Miller-Heidke, Cub Sport, Alice Skye and more: Australian music for isolated times Summary: We’ve published a bunch of articles about how the coronavirus crisis has impacted the Australian arts industry – and musicians, being asked to play fo …
Taylor Swift accuses Trump of 'stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism' Taylor Swift has accused Donald Trump of “stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism” after tweets sent by the president appeared to threaten vio …
Wagner’s Parsifal by Roger Scruton review – in defence of the insufferable In his 1998 book On Hunting, Roger Scruton defended the unspeakable in pursuit of the uneatable. In his last, now posthumously published book, the phi …
'This man knows he's dying as surely as I do': a doctor's dispatches from the NHS frontline Death has been headline news for so long now, I am beginning to feel like a plague doctor. My next patient, an 89-year-old from a care home, is perilo …
'Things fall apart': the apocalyptic appeal of WB Yeats's The Second Coming In April 1936, three years before his death, WB Yeats received a letter from the writer and activist Ethel Mannin. The 70-year-old Yeats was a Nobel p …
Children’s books roundup – the best new picture books and novels For readers of eight-plus this month, The List of Things that Will Not Change (Andersen) from the Newbery-winning author Rebecca Stead follows Bea, a …
Elgar & Beach: Piano Quintets review – the Takács and Garrick Ohlsson in a passionate embrace “Wood magic, so elusive and delicate,” was Lady Elgar’s description of her husband’s new composition for piano and string quartet, written in West Sus …
To err is human – even for the greatest poets Readers of the world’s finest poetry have often skated over inconsistencies, preferring not to believe the poet was capable of a mistake. Now an Oxfor …
Coriky: Coriky review – keeping it hardcore It’s difficult to overstate the significance of Fugazi. An American art-rock institution, they provided a slinky, authoritative moral racket from the …
One to watch: Coach Party Countless islands make up the United Kingdom, and the Isle of Wight might be the most misunderstood of them all. It’s never just been home to teenager …
Igor Levit to play 20-hour Eric Satie piece as 'silent scream' The German-Russian pianist Igor Levit will perform a rarely played, 20-hour Eric Satie composition to a global audience on Saturday to highlight the p …
Hilary Mantel: 'Thomas Cromwell would have locked us down for longer' Thomas Cromwell, who lost family members to “sweating sickness” as the disease spread during his years in King Henry VIII’s court, would have enforced …
Stuart Evers: 'We either look into the gutter or at the upper classes' Stuart Evers’s acclaimed debut collection Ten Stories About Smoking won the London book award in 2011. His new novel The Blind Light is an ambitious f …
In brief: Walking the Great North Line; All Our Broken Idols; The Farm – review Summary: Walking the Great North Line Robert Twigger Orion, £20, pp320 Robert Twigger’s travelogues have always had a wonderful globetrotting sense of adventur …
Diplo: Presents Thomas Wesley Chapter One: Snake Oil review – country cash-in Given that last year’s biggest song (by whatever metric you care to choose) was Lil Nas X‘s country-rap breakout track Old Town Road, it’s perhaps not …
John Gregory obituary My brother, John Gregory, who has died aged 95, was an award-winning musician, composer and arranger. He wrote and arranged music for 27 films, includ …
No pubs, no kissing, no flying: how Covid-19 is forcing authors to change their novels Tom Watson, the former deputy leader of the Labour party, has been having a busy lockdown. Signed up to write a political thriller called The House, h …
Circles and Squares by Caroline Maclean review – Hampstead's brave and brilliant souls Summary: Artists, wrote the critic Myfanwy Evans in 1937, were in the middle of a thousand battles: “Hampstead, Bloomsbury, surrealist, abstract, social realis …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s, No 5: Dead or Alive – You Spin Me Round (Like a Record) Summary: The UK production trio Stock Aitken Waterman (SAW) dubbed their studio the Hit Factory, and with good reason. Not only did it generate hits – Never Go …
Billie Eilish, Jay-Z and more voice solidarity with George Floyd protesters Stars from across the pop music spectrum, including Billie Eilish, Adele, Jay-Z, Ariana Grande and more have used their sizeable platforms to support …
Poem of the week: Poem by Paul Bailey Poem My last of days was there to contemplate when words absconded from me as long ago as Nineteen-forty-one. I must have heard the nurses talk of dea …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Lockdown has persuaded goodyorkshirelass to lift C …
Bob Dylan: where to start in his back catalogue Summary: The album to start with The Times They Are A-Changin’ (1964) The cover told the story. After the portrait of the unformed boy, fresh in from Minnesota …
#TheShowMustBePaused: music industry plans day of silence for George Floyd On Tuesday, the music industry will observe a “blackout day” in the wake of George Floyd’s death and the protests raging across the country. The demon …
Minor Detail by Adania Shibli review – between-the-lines horror In Adania Shibli’s third novel, a young Arab woman is raped and murdered by Israeli troops in 1949. The difficulty of portraying the atrocity lies at …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 4, Donna Summer – I Feel Love In 1975, a stellar team based in Germany laid the groundwork for a musical revolution, the aftershock of which is still being felt today. American sin …
Fiction for older children reviews – monster quests and inner challenges Summary: Coping with threat and change aren’t themes solely reserved for the present moment. Overcoming obstacles is one of the most inexhaustible themes in ch …
Lennie Niehaus, longtime Clint Eastwood composer, dies aged 90 Summary: Lennie Niehaus, who as Clint Eastwood’s favoured composer created the scores to Unforgiven and 12 more of his films, has died aged 90. He died at his …
Isaac Newton proposed curing plague with toad vomit, unseen papers show It is not as bad as suggesting injections of disinfectant. Isaac Newton’s 17th-century prescription for plague – which blended powdered toad with toad …
Our Mutual Friend by Charles Dickens is our reading group book for June Summary: Our Mutual Friend has won the vote and will be our Charles Dickens book for June. And it’s a big one. The 14th and final complete novel that Dickens w …
'No downside': Johnny Marr, Best Coast and Jason Isbell on how sobriety improves music My sobriety began with a jump, falling into murky water. That’s not a metaphor: swimming in the middle of nowhere in my native South Africa in 2012, I …
An all black Desmond Elliott shortlist shows the future is here - and it is in good hands I am chair of the judges for the Desmond Elliott prize for debut writers this year and read through lockdown alongside my fellow judges Sonia Sodha an …
Lucy Crowe/Anna Tilbrook review – bittersweet beauty Marking the 20th anniversary of their first concert together, Lucy Crowe and Anna Tilbrook gave the opening song recital in the Wigmore Hall/Radio 3 l …
Run the Jewels: ‘I want the oppressors to know they haven’t created complete hopelessness’ Run the Jewels have enjoyed one of the more improbable rises to fame in recent hip-hop history. Two figures nearing 40, from the genre’s margins – Kil …
Jack Colwell: Swandream review – theatrical, raw songs packed with pain and soaring survival A friend of mine instinctively reacts to dramatic pop songs – the type of thing with vocal and musical flourishes that feel theatrical; big swings in …
The Mystery of Charles Dickens by AN Wilson review – a great writer's dark side Near the end of The Mystery of Charles Dickens, AN Wilson quotes at length from a letter written by Philip Larkin to his lover Monica Jones. The poet …
Do the work: an anti-racist reading list Every black person I know right now is exhausted. They are exhausted by the two pandemics disproportionately hurting and killing black people: Covid-1 …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 3, The Beatles – She Loves You To hear She Loves You bursting out of a radio in the last week of August 1963 was to recognise a shout of triumph. Everything the Beatles had promised …
The Seduction by Joanna Briscoe review – therapist v family Summary: Joanna Briscoe’s fifth novel opens with Beth spending a restless night on her therapist’s couch. She has abandoned her husband and child, seduced by t …
Lizzo and Lil Nas X criticise Blackout Tuesday for obscuring protests Lizzo and Lil Nas X have condemned a music industry-sponsored social media movement to suspend business activities in support of global protests spark …
What Is the Grass by Mark Doty review – Walt Whitman and me Summary: “I celebrate myself, and sing myself”: Walt Whitman lived by the unforgettable opening lines of his collection of poems, Leaves of Grass. When the boo …
Unknown Hemingway short story Pursuit As Happiness published An unknown short story by Ernest Hemingway, recounting a hunt for a huge marlin, which echoes the narrative of The Old Man and the Sea, has been publi …
'It was heartbreaking': the day Bob Marley played Crystal Palace What turned out to be the last Garden Party in Crystal Palace, on 7 June 1980, had already been pretty memorable. Joe Jackson was booed off stage afte …
Rosemarie Wright obituary My former teacher Rosemarie Wright, who has died aged 88, was a pianist of rare poetry and refinement. Her first international successes came in Vienn …
Anti-racist book sales surge in US and Britain after George Floyd killing Books tackling racism and white supremacy by authors including Reni Eddo-Lodge, Ijeoma Oluo and Layla F Saad are selling out in Britain in the wake of …
Nirvana: Krist Novoselic praises Trump's 'strong and direct' protest speech Former Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic has praised Donald Trump for the “law and order” speech he gave on 1 June in response to protests sparked by th …
Sean Shibe review – a nonchalant virtuoso and boundary breaker Summary: At 28, guitarist Sean Shibe may be one of the youngest of this month’s Wigmore Hall recitalists, but the calm authority with which he delivered this l …
Mark Ricaldone obituary “Ascoltatrici ed ascoltatori gentili” or “Dear listeners”: these are the opening words of the Italian composer Pietro Mascagni in the spoken introduct …
Sia, Washington, Tkay Maidza and more: Australia's best new music for June Summary: Bad//Dreems – Desert Television For fans of: the Go-Betweens, Midnight Oil, Divinyls There’s an uneasy, isolated air to the music of Bad//Dreems, info …
The Australian book you've finally got time for: Carpentaria by Alexis Wright One evening in the driest grasses in the world, a child who was no stranger to her people, asked if anyone could find hope. The people of parable and …
The Vanishing Half by Brit Bennett review – a twin's struggle to 'pass' for white Mallard, a fictional town in Louisiana, is a liminal “third place”. Established in 1848, it is inhabited by light-skinned African Americans “who would …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 2, The Specials – Ghost Town In early 1981, the Specials were both at the top of their game and in their death throes. They had enjoyed a dizzying, agenda-setting rise to fame. Se …
Jessie Ware: What's Your Pleasure? review – dancefloor diva back where she belongs The comfort zone has a bad reputation. No artist wants to be seen to be creatively complacent, or uncompetitive, a state of affairs that’s much more a …
Tom Jones's 20 greatest songs – ranked! 20. The Hitter (2008) Tom Jones’s 2008 album 24 Hours was a mixed bag, with cheery efforts to recapture his swinging mojo (If He Should Ever Leave You …
Daugherty: This Land Sings review – exuberant polyglot Woody Guthrie celebration Michael Daugherty’s music has always embraced the full, polyglot spectrum of American culture. He’s composed a Metropolis Symphony after the Superman …
The Sweet bassist Steve Priest dies aged 72 Steve Priest, bassist and vocalist with glam rock band the Sweet, has died age 72. His bandmates confirmed the news, sharing a statement from the fami …
Live music returns to Royal Opera House for an online audience The Royal Opera House is to host its first live event since closing its doors to the public more than 11 weeks ago. The first concert in a series of t …
Wiley on his final album: 'I need to not let grime die on the way out' While I was waiting for Wiley to answer the phone for our interview, he was busily tweeting about the greatness of The Wire (“people will be tryna cop …
Siti Muharam: Siti of Unguja review – scion of taarab pioneer redefines it The Indian Ocean archipelago of Zanzibar has historically been a meeting place of cultures, from the Indian spice trade to the east African slave trad …
Neil Tennant on West End Girls: 'It's about sex and escape. It's paranoid' Summary: We named West End Girls the greatest ever UK No 1. Did we get it right? Well, I would have chosen Good Vibrations. It’s obviously intensely subjective …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: 100-1 As the coronavirus lockdown continues, the Guardian’s music desk thought you might be in need of a distraction – something to send you down memory lan …
A Registry of My Passage Upon the Earth by Daniel Mason review – rich pleasures Daniel Mason’s novels come slowly – his latest, The Winter Soldier, took 14 years to complete. This is his first collection of short fiction, and it i …
The 100 greatest UK No 1 singles: what did we miss? After our six-week countdown – and we realise that was long enough for entire civilisations to shift on their foundations – we’ve completed our list o …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 1, Pet Shop Boys – West End Girls West End Girls is a lens on to a glamorous demimonde. Primped young women and hungry young men meet in a corner of London that is starting to gentrify …
Kate NV's lockdown listening: 'I'm definitely a major key person!' I’ve spent the whole lockdown at home in Moscow. It’s funny, I’d actually planned to spend March and April at home, writing new music – that was the p …
Lionel Shriver: 'Moby-Dick? Get on with it: did the old bastard catch the fish, or didn’t he?' The book I am currently reading I just finished Catherine Lacey’s new novel Pew. I enjoyed it very much. The writing is top drawer, and the text is ex …
Ambush: Ask My Brother review – fierce dispatch from a hostile state In 2017, Ambush’s cousin Nuno Cardoso died in police custody. With protesters around the world mobilising in solidarity with the US Black Lives Matter …
Lockdown life in your 20s and 80s by Megan Nolan and Margaret Drabble Megan Nolan When I was forced out of my cheerfully ignorant denial about Covid-19 – the day I had to abandon a long anticipated three month stay in Ne …
‘It's not our fault!’ Are the Coronas the unluckiest band of 2020? If you grew up in the 70s named Damien, run any of the country’s Isis healing crystal shops or hail from the proud and ancient clan McBoatface, you’ll …
Jacqueline Wilson asks children to join Silly Squad this summer Summary: British children may be facing a summer in lockdown, but according to the writer Jacqueline Wilson it isn’t the moment to attempt the classics, but fo …
Is ‘bluster’ really the best word for Boris Johnson’s vacuous jabbering? On 18 March, Boris Johnson told parliament he was “absolutely certain” that the government’s Covid-19 strategy would “succeed”. This is the kind of va …
Pavel Kolesnikov and Samson Tsoy review – piano duo bring electrifying intimacy Most musicians with regular duet partners will have been feeling the wrench of separation during lockdown, but not the pianists Pavel Kolesnikov and S …
Christos Tsiolkas and Tara June Winch join our book club to discuss unmissable Australian books A friend once confessed to me that on long haul international flights she has a policy of only watching Australian-made in-flight entertainment, to ca …
Ball Park Music, Alex the Astronaut, Gordi and more: Australian music for isolated times We’ve published a bunch of articles about how the coronavirus crisis has impacted the Australian arts industry – and musicians have been hit harder th …
The Dominant Animal by Kathryn Scanlan review – deeply, darkly enjoyable These 40 very short stories by the American author Kathryn Scanlan inhabit a world of human failure. Families dissolve through vagrant desire and inne …
The Lockhart Plot by Jonathan Schneer review – the British government v Lenin What if the bullets that Fanny Kaplan fired at Lenin on 30 August 1918 had taken his life and not just wounded him? Whether the Bolshevik regime, then …
Max Brooks: 'Pandemics come in predictable cycles. If I'm the smartest guy in the room, we're in big trouble' Max Brooks is getting a little tired of being proved right. An author with cult appeal and massive sales, he is regularly referred to as “a soothsayer …
Hisham Matar on how the Black Death changed art forever Summary: In 2016, when I finished writing The Return, a book about my journey back to Libya after 33 years of not being able to go there for political reasons, …
Classical home listening: Herbert Howells, Sean Shibe's Bach and Royal Opera's Il trittico • Herbert Howells’s Missa Sabrinensis, written for the Worcester Three Choirs festival in 1954 and dedicated to the Severn – a river associated both w …
Wretchedness by Andrzej Tichý review – a musical journey Summary: Andrzej Tichý’s English-language debut opens in Malmö as a young cellist contemplates a challenging piece he has to perform. Then an encounter with a …
Michael Rosen takes first steps as he recovers from Covid-19 Summary: Michael Rosen, the writer, poet and broadcaster who spent 47 days in intensive care with coronavirus has taken his first steps since beginning his rec …
The best recent poetry – review roundup “I bring you no fireworks”, claims Alan Buckley’s poem “Flame”, musing on a matchbox’s instruction to “use sparingly”. Touched (Happenstance, £10) is …
One to watch: BenjiFlow When BenjiFlow was a youngster in Edmonton, London, he aspired to be a grime MC – but you wouldn’t know it from how smoothly he sings, or how omnivoro …
Why today’s musicians should follow classical greats ... and improvise Bach, Mozart and Beethoven all thrilled audiences with their spontaneous improvisations. But today’s classical pianists have lost the art, according t …
GoGo Penguin: GoGo Penguin review – adrenaline rush Summary: At times on this fourth album from the Manchester trio you want to ask: “What’s the rush?” A pell-mell, pedal-to-the-floor approach is, of course, one …
Isabel Colegate: 'I don't think you go about feeling proud of your own books' Isabel Colegate, 88, is the author of 13 novels, most famously The Shooting Party (1980), which is set on a country estate in 1913 and was made into a …
The Next Great Migration by Sonia Shah review – why people wander Sonia Shah’s last two books Pandemic, published in 2016, and The Fever, published in 2010, introduced her as a storyteller in a novel genre: travel bo …
Brigid Mae Power: Head Above the Water review – quotidian magic On her third album, Irish folk singer Brigid Mae Power sees no disconnect between ancient and modern. Neither does her haunting voice, an instrument t …
The Mystery of Charles Dickens by AN Wilson review – uncomfortable insights AN Wilson starts his homage to Dickens by firing off a fusillade of adjectives. The man who nicknamed himself the Inimitable was, Wilson says, “hyper- …
In brief: Au Revoir, Tristesse; The Lightness; Chanel's Riviera – review Summary: Au Revoir, Tristesse: Lessons in Happiness from French Literature Viv Groskop (Abrams Press, £17.99, pp256) On the telly in the 1980s, Groskop watched …
Steve Priest obituary ‘There was one gig we did in Scotland where the girls were screaming so loud that I couldn’t hear us – and we were not a quiet band,” said Steve Pries …
Kenny Young obituary Kenny Young, who has died aged 79, was a gifted songwriter, musician and producer best known for co-writing the Grammy Hall of Fame song Under the Boa …
2,500 rare texts from Islamic world to go online for free More than 2,500 rare manuscripts and books from the Islamic world covering a period of more than a thousand years are to be made freely available onli …
Wretchedness by Andrzej Tichý review – a tornado of voices and timelines Summary: If modernism exposed the ordinary realist novel as a kind of cover-up job on the essential messiness of human consciousness, its aversion to literary …
Miles Davis: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Kind of Blue (1959) Kind of Blue isn’t just the best introduction to Miles Davis, it’s the best introduction to jazz as a whol …
#Publishingpaidme: authors share advances to expose racial disparities Authors from Roxane Gay to Matt Haig have been sharing what they were paid to write their books in order to highlight the disparity between what black …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Because things are as they are, Waskindleuser has …
Bristol's Colston Hall commits to name change by autumn 2020 Bristol Music Trust has committed to changing the name of Colston Hall, the city’s flagship concert venue, by the autumn following the removal of the …
Isserlis/Rushdie Momen review – joyful music making Summary: Steven Isserlis has been busy teaching, writing and studying Bach during the lockdown, explained the Radio 3 announcer. He hasn’t risked a Covid cut, …
'We could go to the wall in 12 weeks' – are we just going to let classical music die? Summary: From top to bottom, from big to small, from freelancer to staffer, from humble hall to grand auditorium, the world of classical music is facing its bi …
Poetry book of the month: The Kabul Olympics by John McAuliffe – review John McAuliffe is Irish but many of the poems in his sympathetic fifth collection are set in Manchester, where he teaches at university. One of the mo …
Why musicians are switching to Twitch to broadcast from home Summary: Rich Medina is one of the most respected DJs in the music industry, spinning hip-hop, house, soul, afrobeat, funk and dance tunes for audiences around …
'A reconsideration of the white male cowboy': the rise of ambient country For a few hours one Tuesday last May, Brooklyn felt like a lonesome prairie. Oakland-based composer and guitarist Chuck Johnson had taken the opening …
Bonnie Pointer: from country to disco, this Sister did it for herself There were effectively two different versions of the Pointer Sisters. There was the 80s hit machine, a trio whose sound existed somewhere between soul …
Neil Gaiman and Chris Riddell announce new 'piratical adventure' Summary: Neil Gaiman has dug out a story he first wrote on a scrap of paper more than a decade ago and turned it into a new book for “anyone of any age who lik …
Letter: Alan Williams obituary Alan Williams was the most excitable person I have ever known. Communism excited him particularly, all the more so because it was almost impossible to …
Don Weller obituary Don Weller, a world-class saxophonist with a big sound, a big presence and a capricious improviser’s imagination, sometimes seemed more at home playin …
Deborah Lavin obituary My mother, Deborah Lavin, who has died aged 68 of lung cancer, started out as an actor, moved into teaching English and finished up writing plays and …
'Urban' no more: black British music execs call for industry reforms A collective of senior black music industry executives from companies including Warner, Sony, Universal Music Group, BMG, Live Nation, Spotify and the …
The Lightness by Emily Temple review – fetishising girlhood It is elitist, precocious, histrionic and oh-so-earnest, but The Secret History – Donna Tartt’s 1992 debut about murderous classics students – is lite …
Taylor Swift: 'Racial injustice has been ingrained in US state government' Taylor Swift has accused local and state governments in the US of harbouring institutional racism, and has called on her fans to elect candidates comm …
'It reminded me I should not go quietly': readers' favourite UK No 1s The Commodores: Three Times a Lady To make up for the shocking shortage of ballads in the 100, here’s one of the biggest, written for Frank Sinatra be …
LOTE by Shola von Reinhold review – a celebration of eccentricity Summary: The narrator of Shola von Reinhold’s debut novel is obsessed with various eccentric literary socialites from the 1920s – figures such as Stephen Tenna …
Humankind by Rutger Bregman review – why we are all deep-down decent Like most big-idea books, this one begins by absurdly overstating the novelty of its argument. The author promises to reveal “a radical idea” that has …
Top 10 books about Tokyo Summary: Tokyo: an elusive fictional character in its own right, the subject or stage of many a novel, anime, film or song. It’s a vast city, almost impossible …
YG, Che Lingo, Kendrick Lamar: the protest songs of Black Lives Matter 2020 The slow and inhumane killing of George Floyd, coupled with the frustration of lockdown and mass unemployment, have created the conditions necessary f …
UK orchestras may not survive coronavirus pandemic, conductors warn Two of Britain’s most influential conductors, Sir Simon Rattle and Sir Mark Elder, have warned of a “devastated landscape” in classical music after th …
Black British authors top UK book charts in wake of BLM protests Summary: Bernardine Evaristo and Reni Eddo-Lodge have become the first black British women to top the UK’s fiction and nonfiction paperback charts, in a week w …
Paul Lewis review – Beethoven and Schubert shaped with muscularity and grace Beethoven and Schubert have long been the cornerstones of Paul Lewis’s repertory, and for his Wigmore Hall/Radio 3 lockdown recital, he gave us a work …
Ezio Bosso obituary My collaborator and friend Ezio Bosso, who has died aged 48 of cancer, was an award-winning Italian composer and conductor. He relentlessly toured and …
The Cat and the City by Nick Bradley – ingenious Tokyo tales Summary: In the sixth story in The Cat and the City, “Chinese Characters”, a teacher of Japanese tells her American student: “Characters shift meaning when pla …
Publishers want more black authors. Why have they silenced us for so long? The publishing industry is stilted and archaic. I worked in it for seven years, and left due to reasons I can’t legally talk about. Though, in that ti …
Paul Weller: On Sunset review – warm, wise and still capable of surprise In 2014, Paul Weller released his umpteenth compilation, surveying a career now into its sixth decade. More Modern Classics came with sleeve notes wri …
Rupert Hine obituary Summary: The musical career of Rupert Hine, who has died aged 72, might have been designed as the antidote to pigeonholing. Starting in the early 1960s as half …
How do you stop the far-right using the Punisher skull? Make it a Black Lives Matter symbol Sometimes it takes a bootleg T-shirt to stop a bootleg T-shirt. For years, the military, the police and white supremacists have displayed the skull sy …
Verdi: Otello review – Kaufmann captains the drama but Pappano steers There are only a handful of stars now for whom a major label will finance a full studio recording, and in the top three is Jonas Kaufmann, whose debut …
'Protest': how speaking out became an act of dissent Summary: Are we in for a summer of protest? Bubbles of anti-lockdown gatherings in the spring were followed, after the killing of George Floyd by Minneapolis p …
Stormzy to donate £10m to black British causes over 10 years Stormzy has announced he will donate £10m to black British causes over the next 10 years: “Organisations, charities and movements that are committed t …
Adam Walker/James Baillieu review – remarkable playing but recital lacked real centre Summary: Looking through the four weeks of the Wigmore Hall’s current lunchtime series it’s clear that the emphasis is on mainstream repertoire, programmes aim …
'I loved the weirdness' – can Laura Marling's crowdless gig rescue live music? After three months of shuttered concert venues, hearing Laura Marling’s voice eddy around the Union Chapel in north London is like being dosed with a …
Country group Lady Antebellum change name to Lady A due to slavery connotations Summary: Lady Antebellum, the trio who have topped the US country album charts five times, are to change their name to Lady A due to the slavery connotations h …
Why is JK Rowling speaking out now on sex and gender debate? Why has JK Rowling chosen to write about her concerns? The Harry Potter author has published a 3,600-word essay setting out in more detail than before …
Merriam-Webster to revise racism definition after woman’s campaign In a blow to arguments that end with “well, this is the dictionary definition of racism”, the dictionary definition of racism is being revised. Editor …
‘We’re so nervous': England’s bookshops prepare to reopen on Monday Summary: Melissa Davies had planned to fulfil a lifelong dream and open her independent bookshop, Pigeon Books, in Southsea, at the beginning of April. Those p …
Jehnny Beth: To Love Is to Live review – solo Savage defiant and intimate Summary: Jehnny Beth is best known as the frontwoman of Savages: the always monochromatic, post-punk four-piece whose dissonant debut album was nominated for t …
Tamar-kali: Shirley Original Soundtrack review – fascinatingly eerie and claustrophobic Born and based in Brooklyn, Tamar-kali leads a broad array of musical projects. She fronts a PJ Harvey-ish rock outfit under her own name, and feature …
Chloe x Halle: Ungodly Hour review – classy R&B from precocious all-rounders The talents of Chloe and Halle Bailey have never languished in obscurity. As young children, the Atlanta-born sisters acted in big-budget movies; when …
Susan Choi: ‘I've failed to finish Ulysses on many occasions - this time I predict success' The book I am currently reading James Joyce’s Ulysses. A little at a time. This time I’m definitely going to finish it (see below). The book that chan …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Rosalía ft Travis Scott, Diplo, Rak-Su Rosalía ft Travis Scott TKN Rosalía’s here to rescue summer with two minutes and nine seconds of furious reggaeton. TKN reunites her with Travis Scott …
The US is still segregated – but is our democracy up to the challenge? With the crescendo of public outcry around the killing of George Floyd, I fear there’s little need for another person voicing a commonly held opinion. …
Michael Rosen returns to Twitter after long battle with coronavirus Michael Rosen has returned to Twitter, as the former children’s laureate continues to recover from Covid-19, thanking his family for meeting the “terr …
All together now: virtual choirs thrive amid lockdown Summary: Concerts and choir practice may be off the table during lockdown, but in the face of isolation and adversity people are turning to the power of song m …
Roderick Williams and Joseph Middleton review – expressive and nuanced ‘Woman’s Hour”, the title that Roderick Williams had given to his lunchtime recital with the pianist Joseph Middleton, was only slightly tongue in che …
Aubrey Burl obituary Aubrey Burl, who has died aged 93, was an unusual archaeologist for our times. The enthusiast’s megalithic expert, he combined the advantages of exper …
Fictional portrait of Jo and Edward Hopper wins Walter Scott prize Summary: Irish author Christine Dwyer Hickey’s exploration of the marriage of the American artists Edward and Jo Hopper has won the £25,000 Walter Scott prize …
Taylor Swift: monuments that celebrate racist figures 'make me sick' Taylor Swift is calling on Tennessee lawmakers to remove racist monuments, arguing “villains don’t deserve statues”. “As a Tennessean, it makes me sic …
Bob Dylan: Rough and Rowdy Ways review – a testament to his eternal greatness In recent weeks, musicians have come up with an impressive variety of ways to keep their fans amused during lockdown. There have been online listening …
Writers & Lovers by Lily King review – a kind of gorgeous agony In John Singer Sargent’s 19th-century portrait The Daughters of Edward Darley Boit, three young girls in neat period dresses gaze blankly at the viewe …
Overcoming fears, discovering nature ... what I have learned from lockdown Summary: Anne Enright: ‘Disaster brings out the best in children’ I remember being at an airport gate (back in the other life and somewhere far away), watching …
It has been easier to cope with my cancer during lockdown - and books have been a lifeline I wrote my latest novel, Remain Silent, with a 9cm tumour pushing my brain over its midline. But I didn’t know about it. I was deep into researching O …
Classical home listening: Alina Ibragimova's Shostakovich; Haydn with the Dudoks; Britten on film • The Russian-British violinist Alina Ibragimova, versatile, virtuosic and astute in every kind of repertoire (listen to her play Bach), has establish …
The best food books to take you overseas - while stuck at home Tales of faraway dining, harvests and exotic markets are particularly welcome at a time when international travel is on hold. Few roving writers were …
One to watch: Drab City Drab City make strangely cinematic music, full of flutes, vibraphones, soft vocals and glitchy beats. Their sound recalls bands such as Broadcast, Tin …
Laura Marling live at Union Chapel review: up close and virtual Gone, for the time being, is the staticky hush of an expectant crowd at an old-school gig. Cancelled, too, is the wider tour Laura Marling would have …
Kevin Figes Quartet: Changing Times review – constantly fascinating I didn’t think I was going to like this album at first, when greeted by the strains of an electronic sequencer. But this faded into a beautifully play …
Roger Robinson: 'Poets can translate trauma' Roger Robinson is a writer who has taught and performed worldwide. His fourth poetry collection, A Portable Paradise, won the Royal Society of Literat …
The Price of Peace by Zachary D Carter review – how liberals betrayed Keynes John Maynard Keynes lived through two world wars as well as the great depression between them, and as an economic adviser to British and American gove …
JK Rowling: from magic to the heart of a Twitter storm Summary: A simple story with a happy ending, with evil unmasked and defeated, has great appeal, especially if there are grim threats and obstacles to negotiate …
Jehnny Beth: To Love Is to Live review – intense and provocative Camille “Jehnny Beth” Berthomier spent the 00s fronting Savages, a post-punk outfit dedicated to discomfort and artistic provocation. The solo Jehnny …
Rose City Band: Summerlong review – a gorgeous record As frontman of San Francisco psyche-rockers Wooden Shjips and one half of the more Krautrock-influenced Moon Duo (with partner Sanae Yamada), Ripley J …
Britain can no longer ignore its darkest chapters - we must teach black history What was invisible yesterday is today suddenly clear and obvious. In the space of just two weeks, forms of structural racism that black people and the …
Drive-in concerts: music to the ears of audience- (and cash-) starved bands Summary: Before covid, the surf rock duo Hockey Dad would usually launch a new album with a string of record store shows. “But obviously we can’t do that right …
The Prison Doctor: Women Inside by Dr Amanda Brown review – why care is better than custody “Linda”, a woman in her 50s, has an appointment with Amanda Brown, a prison doctor at HMP Bronzefield in Ashford, Surrey, since 2016. Linda is inside …
Poem of the week: My pity is fake … by Miriam Neiger-Fleischmann My pity is fake, my poems, atonement. Mutation in my genes began in the gas chambers. Even before that, antigens were created in my blood against tort …
Keith Tippett: British jazz pianist dies age 72 The British jazz pianist and composer Keith Tippett has died aged 72. A post on Tippett’s official Facebook page did not disclose the cause of death. …
Donald Trump's niece Mary set to publish explosive book about her family Donald Trump’s niece, Mary Trump, will publish a “harrowing and salacious” book about the president next month, according to reports. The Daily Beast …
Bootsy Collins: 'We're all funky, just not all of us know it' At the age of 17, William “Bootsy” Collins packed up his homemade bass guitar and left home to tour the world with James Brown. He was heading off in …
Black Writers’ Guild calls for sweeping change in UK publishing More than 100 writers including Booker winner Bernardine Evaristo, Benjamin Zephaniah and Malorie Blackman have called on all major publishing houses …
Bloomsday to Zoomsday: James Joyce celebration goes online James Joyce fans aren’t put off by the 800-odd pages of Ulysses, so perhaps it isn’t surprising that a little thing like a global lockdown can’t dampe …
The Bird Way by Jennifer Ackerman review – an enthralling study Summary: Jennifer Ackerman’s The Genius of Birds was a surprise bestseller – a peppy survey of the science of bird intelligence rivalled only by Tim Birkhead’s …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup The Girl from Widow Hills Megan Miranda Corvus, £14.99, pp336 Olivia Meyer is a hospital administrator in North Carolina. But when she was six, her na …
'We want people to feel they have a home': No Signal, black Britain's new radio station ‘One of the most lyrical, badman tunes ever!” says dancehall DJ Levels, after Real Badman by Vybz Kartel has just played. “This represents Jamaica – t …
Our Mutual Friend is as wildly overblown as the society it depicted Early on in Our Mutual Friend, Charles Dickens treats us to a description of a Thames-side pub: The Six Jolly Fellowship Porters, already mentioned as …
Tulisa denies accusations of racism from X Factor contestant Misha B Pop singer and TV presenter Tulisa has denied accusations of racism and bullying made against her by Misha B, a contestant on talent show The X Factor …
Reni Eddo-Lodge becomes first black British author to top UK book charts Summary: Reni Eddo-Lodge has become the first black British author to take the overall No 1 spot in the UK’s official book charts. Eddo-Lodge’s Why I’m No Long …
Dion: 'When I heard my album sober, I thought "Wow – heroin didn't touch it"' Dion DiMucci was 13, maybe 14, when he first sang in a club for money, roughly the same time as he picked up a heroin habit that lasted 15 years. He g …
Ricky Valance obituary It is now hard to appreciate the national outcry over Ricky Valance’s record Tell Laura I Love Her in the summer of 1960. It told of a young boy who e …
Miles Franklin 2020: Tara June Winch, Carrie Tiffany and Tony Birch shortlisted for Australian writing prize Summary: Miles Franklin alumni have dominated this year’s shortlist of Australia’s most high-profile literary award, with four previously nominated authors inc …
The Golden Rule by Amanda Craig review – a rollicking summer read Amanda Craig’s ninth novel has all the elements of an irresistible summer read: a rollicking plot, a heroine who is more than a match for anything the …
'There's money to be made': buskers return to Britain's high streets On 13 March, singer-songwriter Sherika Sherard completed her final busk at London Bridge. Given the increasing seriousness of the coronavirus pandemic …
Splash! by Howard Means – a refreshing dip into the history of swimming Summary: In a cave in Wadi Sura, in the southwest corner of Egypt, there is evidence that one of the driest corners of the Earth used to be flowing with water. …
Can #BlackoutBestsellerList be the reckoning the publishing industry needs? Could the New York Times’ Best Seller book list ever be filled entirely by black authors? As industries undergo reckonings around race, in the wake of …
Suites, shoots and leaves: Spanish opera house reopens with concert for plants Summary: Attendees of the first post-lockdown concert at Barcelona’s Liceu opera house next week will not need masks or gloves, nor will they be required to ob …
K-pop singer Yohan dies aged 28 Kim Jeong-hwan, known as Yohan in the Korean pop group TST, has died aged 28. TST’s record label, KJ Entertainment confirmed the news, saying: “We are …
'Change is not happening fast enough': UK publishers promise to tackle inequality The “big five” UK publishing houses have separately acknowledged that “change is not happening fast enough” and that they must do a lot more to addres …
Madonna: where to start in her back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Like a Prayer (1989) Madonna’s 1980s hits such as Holiday, Into the Groove and Like a Virgin are brilliantly captured on The I …
Keith Tippett obituary Few free-improvising musicians, singlemindedly stirring the soundworlds of lyricism, jagged dissonance, recognisable melody and raw noise, can bring a …
Mobos founder's open letter highlights racism in UK music industry Kanya King, the founder of the Music of Black Origin awards (Mobos), has said negative media coverage nearly ended the event, in a wide-ranging open l …
Edith Aron obituary My mother, Edith Aron, who has died aged 96, was a German writer, translator and teacher, with strong ties to South American literature. Born in Hombu …
Shaun Tan: 'We’re not being mean to animals – but there is evil in obliviousness' Summary: In the days, weeks and months after the world went into lockdown, we marvelled as animals began to venture out into the habitats we had deserted. Scho …
Support bubbles to shagbubbles: 'bubble' is the go-to word of 2020 When is living in a bubble a good thing? Why, when it’s a “support bubble”, or – since it lifted the prior ban on people from different households hav …
We Are Attempting to Survive Our Time by AL Kennedy review – telling without showing Summary: “Dramatise! Dramatise!” Henry James exhorted in his notebooks and the prefaces to his collected works. When shaping his novels and stories he struggle …
Duffy shares new song, River in the Sky Duffy has shared her second new song since revealing in February that she retreated from the public eye in the early 2010s after being drugged, held c …
Dame Vera Lynn, singer and 'forces' sweetheart', dies aged 103 Dame Vera Lynn, whose song We’ll Meet Again became an anthem of hope and resilience during the second world war, has died aged 103. Her family said th …
Neil Howlett obituary Neil Howlett, who has died aged 85, was a singer of lustrous tone and keen musical intelligence, regarded as the most accomplished Verdian baritone in …
Clyne: Dance; Elgar Cello Concerto review – calm, motoric energy and gorgeous fusions Summary: Dance is Anna Clyne’s hugely impressive new cello concerto, written for the New York-based cellist Inbal Segev and first performed last year. Both the …
Vera Lynn: the best of the wartime spirit, not its continuation by other means That Vera Lynn was 103 years old is of no consequence. She was, in our mind’s eye, forever in her 20s, belting out the string of songs that helped sus …
We'll Meet Again: how toxic nostalgia twisted Vera Lynn's pop masterpiece From Captain Tom Moore’s chart-topping You’ll Never Walk Alone to Katherine Jenkins’ charity take on Vera Lynn’s We’ll Meet Again – a cover version as …
Michael Collins / Michael McHale review – sleek and stylish clarinet Summary: There might be no harps or harpsichords, trumpets or trombones, but woodwind instruments have been respectably represented in the Wigmore Hall’s curre …
The Sunken Land Begins to Rise Again by M John Harrison review – brilliantly unsettling Towards the end of the last century, there was a spate of haunted London novels, by Iain Sinclair, Peter Ackroyd and Chris Petit among others. Broadly …
John Legend: Bigger Love - synths, snogging and schmaltz With 2016’s Darkness and Light, John Legend seemed ready to address the thorny side of love. Shifting from the syrupy, wedding-ready love songs that h …
Saweetie's lockdown listening: 'All we are protesting for is equality, justice, our lives' I’ve been loving quarantine. Everything has been super-chilled; I’ve spent a lot of time by myself which has made me a more creative person. I’ve been …
Billie Eilish granted restraining order over man who repeatedly visited home A US judge has awarded pop singer Billie Eilish a restraining order against a man who repeatedly visited her family home. Prenell Rousseau, 24, who li …
Robert Webb: 'I've given Graham Swift's Waterland to at least two girlfriends and David Mitchell' Summary: The book I am currently reading Sweet Sorrow by David Nicholls. Lockdown has made me an even more idle reader than usual but I was able to settle down …
Bessie Jones: Get in Union review – 60 songs straight from the gut and heart Summary: A woman from a small farming community in the state of Georgia, Bessie Jones was one of the most important traditional singers of the mid-20th century …
Carlos Ruiz Zafón, author of The Shadow of the Wind, dies aged 55 Summary: Carlos Ruiz Zafón, the Spanish author of internationally bestselling novels including The Shadow of the Wind, has died at the age of 55. The novelist, …
Fran Healy's lockdown listening: 'Travis are the opposite of Travis Scott' I’m quarantining in Los Angeles. We’ve lived here for three years and before that Berlin for 10 so I’ve been away from home since 2008. It’s beginning …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Shygirl + Arca, Mr Bungle, Travis Shygirl + Arca Unconditional Nothing else out this month sounds quite so hypnotically otherworldly as Shygirl’s team-up with the sonic polymath Arca. …
Bob Dylan's Rough and Rowdy Ways: discuss his five-star new album The reviews are in and critics have declared Bob Dylan’s new album his best in years. Sure, yes, certain outlets like to append that sobriquet to ever …
Bree Runway: ‘Without sounding cocky, Freddie Mercury reminds me of me’ Pop-rap superstar of the future Bree Runway is trying to unpick the reasons why her Apeshit video – an eccentric update of millennium-era R&B futurism …
The night I watched Vera Lynn with Marlene Dietrich It was an El Alamein reunion in the Albert Hall. Monty was in his box. Vera Lynn and Marlene Dietrich were the stars. Vera Lynn was on stage alone, si …
Josiah Henson: the forgotten story in the history of slavery From its very first moments, Harriet Beecher Stowe’s debut novel Uncle Tom’s Cabin was a smashing success. It sold out its 5,000-copy print run in fou …
Allan Clayton / James Baillieu review – his voice soared through top notes gloriously Even before lockdown, some in the classical music industry were beginning to have conversations about how to cut down on air miles. And one thing the …
The Shadow of the Wind and the remarkable success of Carlos Ruiz Zafón Although all of Carlos Ruiz Zafón’s most successful books were published in the 21st century – The Shadow of the Wind, the first of the quartet on whi …
Husky, Jess Ribeiro, DMA's and more: Australian music for isolated times As some states begin to slowly open back up, Australia’s performing arts industry – hit harder, and earlier, than most others – is still, for the most …
Caitlin Harnett at The Lansdowne – live gigs make boisterous but socially distanced return to Sydney Down the length of some of Sydney’s main drags, plenty of people look to be failing at having a nice night out. It’s just gone 6pm but queues have for …
From the Pyramid stage to your sofa: how to recreate Glastonbury at home Thursday 17:00 OK, let’s be upfront: it is impossible to truly recreate the Glastonbury experience at home unless your home happens to be a 900-acre f …
'It's a man-made marvel': performers on why they love Glastonbury Joseph Mount (Metronomy) What are your memories of going to Glastonbury as a punter or performer? The first time I went I was 16 years old – in 1998, …
The Pink Line by Mark Gevisser review – the world's queer frontiers A decade ago, in an American midwestern town, when I wondered if I was the only gay man within a 1,000-mile radius, I was assured that gay men were pl …
UK public wary of live music as industry calls for £50m rescue package The UK’s grassroots music scene is calling for further financial support from the government, as new data shows audiences are wary of returning to liv …
The Weekend by Charlotte Wood review – old age as a state of mutiny According to the playwright Edward Albee, interviewed by the Guardian in 2001: “The only things you can write about are life and death.” Perhaps so fe …
Bob Dylan: Rough and Rowdy Ways review – enthralling, mischievous – and very male Greatness is often contested territory. Rough and Rowdy Ways, Bob Dylan’s 39th studio album, is awash with pre-eminence, both in its actual and its mo …
One to watch: AA Williams Summary: AA Williams had spent years studying classical music before stumbling across alt-metal titans Deftones in her mid-teens and becoming hooked on “all th …
Valeria Luiselli: 'I look at Mexico from afar with pain and love' Summary: Valeria Luiselli, 36, is a Mexican-born author whose most recent novel, Lost Children Archive, unfolds during a road trip taken by a couple and their …
The Pink Line; The Book of Queer Prophets; United Queerdom – reviews As we can’t gather this Pride month in person, one thing we might think on at home is the really important work done over the past decade to problemat …
The Group by Lara Feigel review – female friendship and anger It takes a certain insouciance to write a novel about a group of Oxford graduates reminiscing about their Pimm’s-drinking student days in the current …
Phoebe Bridgers: Punisher review – from the heart ‘The doctor put her hands over my liver,” sings Phoebe Bridgers on Garden Song. “She told me my resentment’s getting smaller.” Arresting lyrics such a …
Nadine Shah: 'I’m sick of celebrities in their huge gardens telling us to breathe' Summary: Nadine Shah, 34, was born in South Tyneside to a British-Norwegian mother and British-Pakistani father. Since her 2013 debut, Love Your Dum and Mad, h …
Tom Petty estate issues cease and desist over Trump's use of song Summary: The family of Tom Petty has issued a formal cease and desist letter to the Donald Trump campaign over its use of his song I Won’t Back Down at a rally …
In brief: The Seduction; Good Morning, Destroyer of Men's Souls; James and Nora – review The Seduction Joanna Briscoe Bloomsbury, £16.99, pp384 Briscoe’s latest novel explores the fragile relationship both between mothers and daughters and …
Kay Bateman obituary My friend Kay Bateman, otherwise known as Kay Carroll, who has died of lung cancer aged 71, was the first manager of Mark E Smith’s band, the Fall. Al …
The future of music: ‘No one has anything positive to say about physically distanced gigs. At all’ Summary: Speaking selfishly, I miss volume the most. Tinnitus has been my constant plus-one for such a long time that it’s basically masochism – but it’s true. …
Ray BLK accuses rapper Ambush Buzzworl of sexual assault The British singer Ray BLK has accused Camden rapper Ambush Buzzworl of sexual assault. BLK tweeted that Ambush “aggressively” grabbed and shook her b …
Sports Team: Deep Down Happy review – debut album with plenty to say With an eloquence you’d hope for from a band made up of Cambridge graduates and an old-school penchant for slagging off their indie peers, London-base …
'It felt like the last show on Earth': the bittersweet rise of Rolling Blackouts Coastal Fever ‘It was like the tightening of a vice,” says Rolling Blackouts Coastal Fever’s Fran Keaney, of the encroaching lockdown measures that have put his ban …
'Factually impossible': Justin Bieber denies sexual assault allegation Summary: Justin Bieber has denied allegations that he sexually assaulted a woman in March 2014, sharing a series of tweets he believes prove that “this story i …
The Covid-19 Catastrophe; Covid-19: The Pandemic That Never Should Have Happened – review On 3 March, Boris Johnson cheerily told viewers tuning into a government press briefing on coronavirus that Britain was “extremely well prepared” for …
The Summer of Her Life by Thomas von Steinaecker and Barbara Yelin – review In books, people don’t wear masks – or not yet. All the same, as I turned the pages of The Summer of Her Life, a graphic novel set largely in a care h …
Wellness is a seductive lie – and it is changing how we treat illness In 2017 I received an Arts Council England grant to complete research for my book Sanatorium. Writing a book was the only way I could think of funding …
Sound recovery: how live music is returning to Munich It was at the end of May that I heard live music for the first time in almost three months. Not over Zoom or YouTube. There were no cameras or wireles …
Poem of the week: Glacier by Gillian Clarke Glacier The miles-deep Greenland glacier’s lost its grip, sliding nine miles a year towards the sea on its own melt-water. As, forty years ago, the sl …
Mariah Carey: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Butterfly (1997) Mariah Carey’s early 90s commercial megastardom was founded on the basis of her virtuoso vocal prowess, but h …
Jessie Ware webchat: your questions answered on sweaty clubs, table manners and activism But we leave on a tasty note: cedwards2817 asks I adore listening to Table Manners - what would your desert island meal and/or disc be? laurasnapes as …
Rock against racism? Metal's varied response to Black Lives Matter There’s no point denying metal has a more complicated relationship with race than many of its adherents would like to admit, or confront. At its most …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. GELBuck “has just surfaced after a couple of weeks …
Felicity Bryan obituary Felicity Bryan, who has died of cancer aged 74, was the founder in 1988 of the distinguished literary agency Felicity Bryan Associates. She was liked …
Iestyn Davies/Elizabeth Kenny review – sweet melancholy and liquid beauty Summary: Music itself and its power to console was the underlying theme of countertenor Iestyn Davies’s lockdown recital with lutenist Elizabeth Kenny, a conce …
Martin Loveday obituary Summary: My brother-in-law Martin Loveday, who has died aged 62 from Covid-19 while undergoing treatment for myeloma, was an accomplished and popular cellist. …
Paul McCartney calls for meat to no longer be mandatory in England's school meals Sir Paul McCartney and his daughters Stella and Mary have joined a call to change guidance that makes it mandatory to serve fish, meat and dairy in En …
Rag and Bone by Lisa Woollett review – of mudlarks, scavengers and beachcombers Lisa Woollett grew up on the Isle of Sheppey, at the mouth of the Thames. As a child she became fascinated by what the estuary had swallowed and what …
'We're not doing this to be ironic': are 100 Gecs the world's strangest band? For many US musicians, the height of ambition is winning a Grammy award. More ambitious performers might aim for an EGOT (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, Tony). …
Queen – not that one – to appear on postage stamps No, not that one – the rock band Queen are to feature on a series of UK postage stamps over the summer. They become only the third band to be honoured …
Charles Dickens wrote no fairytale endings – or did he? Summary: Charles Dickens was 53 when he finished Our Mutual Friend – and kept working furiously until he died five years later. He had no idea that when he wro …
‘Black and Asian people not seen as readers’: Bernardine Evaristo condemns books industry Bernardine Evaristo, the first black woman to win the Booker prize, has hit out at “ridiculous” and “misguided” beliefs in the publishing industry, wh …
Queer as folk: traditional British music is now telling LGBT stories In February, on the final night of this year’s Celtic Connections festival, folk music travelled through time in two directions at once. In the main r …
Benjamin Baker/Timothy Ridout review – violin and viola duo make the most of thin pickings Even the most passionate violinists and viola-players would hardly claim that the duo repertoire for their instruments is particularly distinguished. …
Survivor Song by Paul Tremblay; Devolution by Max Brooks review – tales of apocalypse The horror genre offers a frame of reference for global pandemic, however unsettling. In the early weeks of the outbreak Contagion leapt to the top of …
'A billboard with 50 years of layers': readers on Bob Dylan's Rough and Rowdy Ways Paul G, Devon Sometimes, it’s good to sit on the porch with ol’ Bob. He was quite the hurricane back in the day, but now he likes to sip whiskey and t …
Top 10 books about remaking the future There is no consensus on what constitutes a better future or how to cultivate one – such nebulous concepts can really only be interpreted through the …
Never mind the ballads! How bardcore took over pop music Name: Bardcore. Age: A couple of months (if we ignore Sting). Musicologists may come to see 20 April as the starting point. Appearance: Modern hit son …
'Axis of adults': are the White House staff working together to keep Trump in line? In his White House memoir, John Bolton, the belligerently moustachioed former national security adviser, calls the few rational personnel around the p …
Michael Rosen home from intensive care after coronavirus Michael Rosen has finally made it back home after going into intensive care with Covid-19 at the end of March. The award-winning and popular poet and …
Authors call for removal of Booker prize vice-president over 'homophobic' views Damian Barr is leading a charge of writers, including one former Booker prize winner, who are calling on the Booker Foundation to remove the allegedly …
The surge in sales of Indigenous books is heartening but education takes many forms Summary: In the wake of the Black Lives Matter and Aboriginal Lives Matter movements, many of my friends and colleagues have been inundated with requests – how …
Rodney P meets Kojey Radical: 'I don't want my son to always have to fight' Although separated by generations, there is a shared sense of black empowerment and rebellion coursing through the music of Rodney P and Kojey Radical …
Rummage by Emily Cockayne review – the joys of rubbish In 1947 the nation was shocked to hear that British troops in Egypt were wearing pants made out of old flour bags. The war was over, we had won, and y …
Good vibrations: how Bandcamp became the heroes of streaming When Ethan Diamond founded Bandcamp in 2008, he imagined it an alternative to MySpace: an easy-to-use website where bands could interact with fans and …
Delivering joy: meet south London's lockdown book angel In the three months since lockdown began, I’ve spent more on books than I care to admit. But with charity shops and secondhand bookshops shut, donatin …
Michael Eavis: Glastonbury could go bankrupt if it can't be staged in 2021 Glastonbury organisers Michael and Emily Eavis fear they could be in serious financial danger if the festival was cancelled again due to coronavirus. …
Unfinished story by Little Women author Louisa May Alcott published for first time An early story from a young Louisa May Alcott, in which the Little Women author writes of two teenage girls vying for the attentions of a handsome you …
Roger Robinson meets Rachel Long: 'I feel like a mosquito taking on Godzilla' Roger Robinson, 52, is the 2020 winner of the TS Eliot prize and the Ondaatje prize for his latest collection A Portable Paradise. Having previously e …
Booker foundation vice-president removed after 'homophobia' row Emma Nicholson has been removed from her honorary position as vice-president of the Booker Foundation after a groundswell of opposition from the liter …
Zemlinsky: Die Seejungfrau review – baffling neglect of a glorious mermaid There have been a number of occasions in the past few decades when it seemed as if the music of Alexander Zemlinsky would finally receive the attentio …
After 50 years, Glastonbury festival is a triumph of eccentric English culture The truth of the matter is that Glastonbury never really asked the Rolling Stones to play before – I heard they had thought about it, but no official …
Angela Hewitt review – intimate and introspective Bach Although more concerts at Wigmore Hall are planned for September, Angela Hewitt gave the penultimate recital in the current lunchtime series at the Lo …
From Bowie to Beyoncé: Glastonbury's 50 greatest moments Summary: 1. The first year (1970) Glastonbury festival’s first ever booking came from Michael Eavis serenading his cows with the Kinks. “I was playing Lola to …
Martin Parr's Glastonbury tour – photo essay This week I should have been experiencing and photographing the Glastonbury festival for the first time. That it would have been my first is for me is …
The Next Great Migration by Sonia Shah review – movement is central to human history “A wild exodus has begun,” writes Sonia Shah early on in The Next Great Migration. “It is happening on every continent and in every ocean.” In respons …
Haim: Women in Music Pt III review – a cathartic walk on the blue side of life On Haim’s third album, frontwoman Danielle drives endlessly around LA, away from a shaky relationship and her own malaise, sometimes towards illicit d …
Her finest hour: why Glastonbury festival owes so much to Churchill’s granddaughter Normally in late April, the family home where Haggis McLeod raised his daughter Jess would be chaotic. There would be paperwork up to the ceilings – l …
Johny Pitts: 'War and Peace is just ... so long' The book I am currently reading When the world feels like it’s on fire, I often step back into the recent past for answers. I’ve just started The Tope …
Trax Records: Larry Heard and Robert Owens sue for $1m 'unpaid' royalties Summary: The foundational house music producers Larry Heard (AKA Mr Fingers) and Robert Owens are suing Trax Records for allegedly unpaid royalties. In a feder …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Kiesza, Jorja Smith, Dalai Lama Kiesza Love Me With Your Lie Even if she had never released anything else after her 2014 banger Hideaway, pirouetting firecracker Kiesza would for eve …
Kevin Kwan: 'With Crazy Rich Asians my life exploded and I’m still trying to put it back together' It’s difficult to square Kevin Kwan, modern master of high romp, with the dark and brooding personality he claims as his default setting. “I’m actuall …
'The fascists were upset': radical Austrian fairytales published in English for first time Summary: A set of radical fairytales, written by an Austrian aristocrat in the early 20th century to promote social justice, will be published in English for t …
US rapper Huey, known for hit Pop, Lock & Drop It, killed in shooting aged 32 Summary: Huey, the US rapper who scored a major hit in 2006 with Pop, Lock & Drop It, has been killed aged 32. Huey, whose real name was Lawrence Franks Jr, wa …
Mark Padmore/Mitsuko Uchida review – recital series ends on compelling and sombre note When June’s Wigmore Hall concerts were announced one wondered if it were a misjudgment to end them with Schubert’s Winterreise. To be fair, the schedu …
Beyoncé's classic Glastonbury 2011 set – as it happened (nine years ago) So that was it. For the full experience you now need to get Zane Lowe on to smirk that he didn’t see Beyoncé as he was watching “real music” (Queens o …
The Group by Lara Feigel review – friendship and privilege Summary: It is intriguing that Lara Feigel, who has previously wandered the debatable lands between academic research and experimental nonfiction in writing ab …
What if Amy Winehouse had written novels? When this year’s Glastonbury was cancelled, I started thinking about music a lot and, by extension, lyrics. Even though I’m in the business of the wri …
Becoming a writer exposed my dirty secret: I’d stopped reading. Now I’m back at it The man behind the camera gave me an odd look. “The spider from Charlotte’s Web?” I had travelled to the television set in Scotland by train, which ha …
Solitary citizens: the politics of loneliness In recent years loneliness has been much in the news. Prior to Covid-19 it was regularly described as an epidemic. Now that we are in the middle of a …
Lee Child on Jack Reacher: 'I don't like him that much' Jack Reacher has millions of fans all over the world, but his creator, Lee Child, has revealed he doesn’t “like Reacher that much” and originally plan …
Children’s books roundup – the best new picture books and novels Warm, consoling, funny and sad, this month’s picture books offer something for every mood. From Anne Booth and Robyn Wilson-Owen, Bloom (Tiny Owl) is …
Me and my detective by Lee Child, Attica Locke, Sara Paretsky, Jo Nesbø and more “I’ve been doing it 24 years now and I couldn’t do it any more,” says Lee Child as he hands over the reins of his Jack Reacher series to his brother A …
Classical home listening: from the salon to storm-tossed Aldeburgh • This week we enter the salon. Please don’t leave. While not quite champing at the bit for CDs of music by Alfredo Piatti (1822-1901), a star of that …
Haim: Women in Music Pt III review – their most direct album yet A certain lightness has always played about the work of Haim, the three multi-instrumentalist sisters from Los Angeles. Even as their two critically a …
The best books for frazzled parents – and their children Books offering support to parents have come on in leaps and bounds since the days when Gina Ford and Supernanny-style discipline reigned supreme. My g …
Kansas Smitty's: Things Happened Here review – irresistibly groovy Kansas Smitty’s is a live-music bar in Hackney, east London. It’s also the name of the seven-piece band that runs the place and calls it home, a band …
Masha Gessen: 'I never thought I'd say it, but Trump is worse than Putin' Masha Gessen is a Russian-American author and journalist who has been writing about Vladimir Putin and other modern autocrats for two decades. After D …
Nicole Chung: 'If my life were fiction, you would not believe it' Nicole Chung, 39, was born in Seattle and placed for adoption by her Korean parents, before being raised by a white family in Oregon. Her memoir, All …
Adele's classic Glastonbury 2016 set – as it happened (four years ago) Summary: Earlier on Adele said: “I don’t really have many upbeat happy songs which I think is why a lot of people moaned about me coming tonight, but fuck you, …
Ernest Bevin: Labour's Churchill by Andrew Adonis – review Shortly after the formation of the wartime coalition in May 1940, the Evening Standard published one of David Low’s most celebrated cartoons. Above th …
Poetic justice: black lives and the power of poetry Performance poetry revolutionised me. When I was 13, my mother invited me to a group called Leeds Young Authors, which she co-ran with founder and poe …
The Room Where It Happened by John Bolton review – a monument to his own grandiosity Any hairdresser could have told them it wouldn’t work. Trump initially refused to hire John Bolton because he disliked his moustache. That walrus brus …
Ashley 'Dotty' Charles: 'Few moments compare to meeting Oprah!' Ashley “Dotty” Charles is the host of BBC’s 1Xtra breakfast show. Charles, 32, grew up in south London with two brothers and a sister and began rappin …
In brief: The Rain Heron; One Long and Beautiful Summer; The Nickel Boys – review Summary: The Rain Heron Robbie Arnott Atlantic, £14.99, p288 A quietly unsettling fable set in a country beset by ecological, political and economic difficulty …
Nadine Shah: Kitchen Sink review – razor-sharp observations North-eastern singer-songwriter Nadine Shah won acclaim – and a Mercury prize nomination – for her 2017 album, Holiday Destination, in part because sh …
Jessie Ware: What's Your Pleasure? review – rooted in lustful disco Summary: Jessie Ware emerged in 2010, lending her silken vocals to electro producer SBTRKT. A solo career followed but, while the London singer-songwriter’s fi …
Rigged: America, Russia and 100 Years of Covert Electoral Interference by David Shimer - review In 1972, Willy Brandt, the West German chancellor, faced a no-confidence vote tabled by the opposition conservatives. The omens didn’t look good. If a …
Beyoncé urges voters to 'dismantle a racist and unequal system' in the US Beyoncé has been given the humanitarian award at the BET awards, using her speech to encourage viewers to vote “like our life depends on it” in the up …
A cut above: António Variações, Portugal's queer pop superstar In the midst of wild olive trees, a muscular man sporting pink hair and a woman’s swimming costume stares into a mirror. There, at the meeting point o …
Trump's brother tries again to block niece's tell-all book after failed attempt Summary: Donald Trump’s brother is making a second attempt to block publication of the much-anticipated book by their niece Mary Trump, about “the damaged man …
Charles Dickens webchat with Kathryn Hughes: your questions answered Summary: Thank you to Kathryn for giving us so much of her time, and to everyone who has posted a question. Our reading group theme for July will be put to a v …
Poem of the week: Incendiary Art: Ferguson, 2014 by Patricia Smith Summary: This week’s poem is from Incendiary Art, Patricia Smith’s collection of searing elegies for black lives destroyed. The title of the book – a 2018 Puli …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Invisible Man by Ralph Ellison has been mrfloydthu …
Small Hours: The Long Night of John Martyn by Graeme Thomson – review By the time the mercurial, volatile singer-songwriter John Martyn heard that he had been awarded an OBE for his contribution to British music, he was …
Young adult books roundup – review It wouldn’t be summer without a sun-drenched coming-of-age story, so beautifully realised in Meg Rosoff’s seductive and elegant The Great Godden (Bloo …
‘It’s like we just fell on to this planet’: the rise of psych-rockers Khruangbin Onstage, the Texan trio Khruangbin are a strange sight to behold. At their sold-out show at London’s near-5,000 capacity O2 Academy Brixton last Decem …
Johnny Mandel, Oscar-winning composer behind M*A*S*H theme, dies aged 94 Johnny Mandel, the Oscar and Grammy-winning composer behind the theme from M*A*S*H and more, has died aged 94. Details of his death have not been rele …
John McKenzie obituary midMy friend John McKenzie, who has died aged 64 of cancer, was a consummate bass player who recorded and toured with acts such as Lionel Richie, Bob …
Howard Goodall writes choral tribute to health workers who died of coronavirus Choirs may have been forced to stop gathering due to the Covid-19 pandemic, but the London Symphony Chorus has found a way to keep singing – while hon …
Reading group: which black British author should we read in July? Among all the many astonishing things that happened in June, two black British authors topped the UK bestseller charts for the first time. Bernardine …
'We used to shout back: No, you get 'em off!' – Girlschool on 40 years of rocking It’s hard to fathom why Girlschool aren’t more celebrated. Forty years on from their first album, Demolition – released in June 1980 – and they are st …
Sex Robots & Vegan Meat by Jenny Kleeman review – the future of food, birth and death? In a plain factory building in the San Marcos hills, north of San Diego in California, a technological revolution is under way. There, a team of AI ex …
'We had been beat down a lot': the story behind 60s protest anthem Dancing in the Street A few weeks ago, the Motown singer Martha Reeves went to her first protest march since this historic wave began. “I saw people from everywhere, walkin …
Small Pleasures by Clare Chambers review – a suburban mystery In the mid 50s, scientists began to give serious consideration to the possibility of single-sex reproduction. Dr Helen Spurway, a biologist at the Uni …
Mickey Madden, Maroon 5 bassist, arrested on domestic violence charges Mickey Madden, bassist with pop-rock group Maroon 5, has been arrested on charges of domestic violence. Los Angeles police confirmed the arrest to the …
Beethoven: where to start with his music It’s not only because this year is the 250th anniversary of his birth that Ludwig van Beethoven (1770-1827) is the obvious composer with whom to begin …
'One of my singles made £3.58': Manga Saint Hilare, grime's overlooked MC Manga Saint Hilare should be out touring his new album Make It Out Alive but, like the rest of us, he’s at home using his time to learn new things. “I …
Top 10 best-dressed characters in fiction The first clothes in western literature, Adam and Eve’s fig leaves, performed their essential fictional function in drawing attention to the protagoni …
After Pop Smoke's death, can UK drill producers maintain their US success? For a few joyful, sweaty months last summer, Welcome to the Party by Brooklyn drill rapper Pop Smoke was the sound of New York. His smoky baritone see …
Ida Haendel obituary The Polish-born violinist Ida Haendel, who has died aged 96, enthralled audiences around the world with a combination of classical rigour and romantic …
The thin, white lie: challenging the 'French women' stereotype What comes to mind when you hear the word “Parisienne”? For most of us, the female in the French capital is, historically, a familiar figure: stylish, …
Margo Price: That's How Rumors Get Started review – country survivor who can take on anything Earlier this year, in a round of interviews to promote her third album – its release ultimately delayed by the coronavirus pandemic – Margo Price anno …
'Every black man have to fight': Buju Banton on prison and liberation At the end of 2018, the reggae star Buju Banton returned to Jamaica after almost seven years in a US prison, and Norman Manley international airport w …
'Guidelines': you can't enforce them, but you can blame people for not following them Have you been following the latest post-lockdown guidelines? Even if you know what they all are, why should you? They are not rules or statutes. So wh …
Dallapiccola: Il Prigioniero review –  hope, despair and musical muscle in fine prison opera Luigi Dallapiccola composed four stage works. One of them, the “sacred representation” Job, has hardly been heard since its premiere 70 years ago, whi …
'Socially distanced Venetian gondolas!' – Rufus Wainwright on his dream festival Location I am a big fan of Venice and my husband and I have spent quite a bit of time there. Even when it’s teeming with tourists – which it won’t be …
Merky author Derek Owusu wins Desmond Elliott prize for 'profound' debut Derek Owusu’s novel-in-verse That Reminds Me, about a turbulent childhood in foster homes and a mental breakdown, has won the Desmond Elliott prize fo …
'Stupidly, feverishly excited': Proms performers on heading back to the Royal Albert Hall Isata Kanneh-Mason I’ve grown up watching and admiring the Proms, I have been part of the audience for so many concerts in previous years and the leve …
BBC Proms: details announced of festival behind closed doors There will be orchestras of Mozart and Beethoven size rather than Mahler and Shostakovich size but at least they will be performing live from the stag …
From Eskimo Joe to Hearts and Rockets: Australia's best new music for July Eskimo Joe – Say Something For fans of: Coldplay, INXS, the Killers It took Eskimo Joe a handful of novelty singles and two albums of intricatepop bef …
Fracture by Andrés Neuman review – the damage of the past Novels are experiments: they offer writers an opportunity to play with time, to invent places and to imagine and inhabit lives other than their own. F …
From Glastonbury to Bluedot: 10 of the best festivals for summer 2021 Glastonbury Since the 2020 festival season has been wiped out by the pandemic, what about next year’s offering of rescheduled musical delights? Things …
London’s New Scene by Lisa Tickner review – seven events that smashed the art world In Lisa Tickner’s exploration of seven key events in the art world between 1962 and 1968 we are drawn into experiences that smashed through the old wa …
Denai Moore: Modern Dread review – hypnotic, surrealist bid for freedom In her previous releases Elsewhere and We Used to Bloom, British-Jamaican artist Denai Moore incorporated R&B, folk and electronic influences, positio …
David Baddiel: 'I don't really have shame as an emotion' The book I am currently reading I’m listening to À la recherche du temps perdu on audiobook. I find it helps with the hoovering. I’m also rereading Ro …
Jay-Z's Team Roc call for prosecution of police officer who shot and killed 3 men Jay-Z’s social justice initiative Team Roc has called for a Wisconsin police officer to be fired and prosecuted, after he shot and killed three people …
England's libraries begin to reopen but grave fears remain over long-term futures As libraries around England cautiously prepare to reopen from Saturday, experts are warning that local authority shortfalls could be the “canary in th …
'I'm like a plant without water': why metal bands are suffering during coronavirus To some outsiders, metal appears chaotic, violent and devoid of emotional value, but inside the message is one of solidarity. Nothing exemplifies this …
David Mitchell: 'I think most writers have a deep-seated envy of musicians' David Mitchell and I are talking – nerdily, greedily – about a moment in popular music when prog rock, folk rock, acid jazz and psychedelia all bubble …
Socially distanced outdoor music venue to open in Newcastle in August The UK’s first large-scale socially distanced music venue is opening in Newcastle this summer. Virgin Money Unity Arena, to be installed at Newcastle …
From Skullcrusher to Jockstrap: the bands who sound nothing like their names Skullcrusher What they should sound like A biker gang of bionic speed metal abattoir workers playing guitars made by stringing pneumatic drills with e …
'I stuck my foot in the door': what it is like to be black in UK publishing Summary: Publishing is in the middle of a reckoning. In the weeks since the death of George Floyd, as black authors topped UK books charts for the first time, …
Wendy Cooling obituary Summary: Wendy Cooling, who has died aged 78, transformed many lives as a teacher, author, anthologist and, especially, as the founder of Bookstart, the flagsh …
Josh Pyke, the Veronicas, Lime Cordiale and more: Australian music for isolated times As some states begin to slowly open back up, Australia’s arts industry is still largely in lockdown – and the music industry was hit harder, and earli …
Love of science, not Trump's ignorance, will make America great again We know what the temperature was in Philadelphia on 4 July 1776, because Thomas Jefferson wrote it down at 6am (68F), 9am (72.25F), 1pm (76F), and 9pm …
The Wild Laughter by Caoilinn Hughes review – an Irish Cain and Abel Caoilinn Hughes’s acclaimed debut novel, 2018’s Orchid and the Wasp, explored the long fallout from the global economic crash of 2008 through the comi …
Bread Winner by Emma Griffin review – victims of the Victorian economy As a lad in 1880s Bermondsey Sid Causer appeased his hunger by filching fruit from market barrows. Louie Stride, brought up dirt poor in genteel Bath, …
Poem of the month: Prayer at Seventy by Vicki Feaver God of thresholds, guide of souls between worlds, have mercy on me: God who, when I asked you if I could pass my last years with less anxiety, changed …
‘We’re the explicit Vengaboys’: meet Bad Boy Chiller Crew, Bradford's bassline stars Summary: It is a sweltering afternoon in Minsk, Belarus, yet Bad Boy Chiller Crew are looking decidedly, well, chilled. Already an underground sensation in Wes …
From Donna Tartt to Irvine Welsh: 10 great novels about friendship Donna Tartt, The Secret History My generation grew up with this story of brilliance and murder among a group of college students. Group allegiance amo …
Classical home listening: of love and death and snails • The title Love and Death (Orchid Classics) could incorporate nearly all music ever written. The Navarra String Quartet, whose playing has a transpar …
Books to transport you: the best travellers' tales for troubled times In times like these, I’m drawn towards short stories, novellas and pithy memoirs with a powerful sense of far-flung places: enigmatic flights of fancy …
Paul Weller: On Sunset review – a mellower modfather When you think of Paul Weller, you do not picture him on Hollywood’s notorious Sunset Strip. Baked either by the sun or lurid neon, a tourist hell tra …
One to watch: Remi Wolf Summary: While she begrudgingly refers to her trippy, kaleidoscopic musical melange as “funky soul pop”, 24-year-old California musician Remi Wolf isn’t a huge …
Mulatu Astatke & Black Jesus Experience: To Know Without Knowing review – an absorbing ride Like one of its sinuous melodies, Ethiopian jazz continues to take unexpected turns. Melbourne’s Black Jesus Experience are one such, an eclectic eigh …
Neil Young says Trump's use of songs at Mount Rushmore 'not OK with me' After two of his songs were used by Donald Trump at Mount Rushmore on Friday, Neil Young had a simple message for the president: “This is not OK with …
Maryse Condé: 'An English author can reach the heart of a Caribbean child' Maryse Condé was born in Guadeloupe in 1937, earned her MA and PhD in comparative literature at Paris-Sorbonne University and went on to have a distin …
Kanye West declares he will run for US president in 2020 Just when you thought 2020 couldn’t get any weirder, rapper Kanye West declared his candidacy for US president. The unlikely challenger to Donald Trum …
British Summer Time Begins review – lyrical social history Of all the scenes set forth in this joyously addictive history of British summer holidays – from shivering Welsh beaches to midge-infested glens, from …
NZCA Lines: Pure Luxury review – dancefloor first-aid for dystopian times Summary: Michael Lovett is a British indie disco eminence grise. A touring member of Metronomy, he played on Christine and the Queens’ first album; he’s also s …
Brit Bennett: 'Last week was truly the wildest week of my life' Brit Bennett, 30, was born and raised in southern California. She attended Stanford University and earned an MFA in fiction at the University of Michi …
Dream Wife: So When You Gonna... review – a punk band that still sounds like one Dream Wife are a very modern rock band: they sing about queer love, miscarriage and misogyny; they work with an all-female recording team; and they ha …
The Australian book to read next: A Cartload of Clay by George Johnston I frequently reread the Australian novels of my youth – and few more so than George Johnston’s autobiographical “Meredith Trilogy” of My Brother Jack, …
Why We Drive review – a motorist puts his foot down Five years ago I sat around a table of Google executives at the company’s Mountain View headquarters in California. They took turns explaining the vir …
The Double X Economy by Linda Scott review – how to solve economic sexism Summary: When I was studying for an MSc at a British university known for its excellence in economics, I was lucky enough to be able to take a module in femini …
Beyoncé, Coachella 2018: a rich tapestry of black cultural excellence If Beyoncé’s fanbase, the Beyhive, is something of a cult, then her live performances are their holy pilgrimage. Although I had been on three previous …
Poem of the week: Sic Vita by Henry David Thoreau Summary: Sic Vita (“It is but thin soil where we stand; I have felt my roots in a richer ere this. I have seen a bunch of violets in a glass vase, tied loosely …
Ennio Morricone obituary Summary: If ever a name was synonymous with movie soundtracks, it was Ennio Morricone. Although it took the Hollywood film industry until 2007 to reward Morric …
Ryan Adams apologises for his 'mistreatment' of friends and colleagues Ryan Adams has apologised for “the ways I’ve mistreated people throughout my life and career” in a statement published on the Daily Mail’s website. Ad …
Kasabian frontman Tom Meighan quits band Tom Meighan has announced that he is leaving Kasabian, the Leicester rock band he co-founded as a student in the late 90s. The band shared a brief sta …
Ennio Morricone: 10 of his greatest compositions Summary: Trying to sum up the maestro’s 66-year career into ten tracks is impossible. His work was simply too diverse to be comprehensively boiled down into a …
How the Isley Brothers made Harvest for the World Ernie Isley, songwriter, drums, guitar As a songwriter, inspiration can strike at any time. I’d just bought a new 12-string acoustic guitar and took i …
From neighbourly romances to Zoom sex: the boom in lockdown erotica When the first coronavirus-related erotica appeared on Literotica, one of the largest erotic fiction websites, in mid-March, the moderators were not s …
Charles Webb obituary Summary: Charles Webb, who has died aged 81, was the author of the 1963 novel The Graduate, which was made into the hit film that helped to define the 1960s. D …
Is ‘irregardless’ a real word? We asked our journalists as battle rages on Merriam-Webster has weighed in on the debate over the word “irregardless”, confirming that it is a proper, dictionary-verified word. The debate over t …
Joni Mitchell, Isle of Wight 1970: the day the music nearly died The last days of August on the Isle of Wight, the weather fair, the island relishing the height of summer holiday season. If there was trepidation amo …
Final Terry Pratchett stories to be published in September The final collection of early stories from the late Terry Pratchett, written while the Discworld creator was a young reporter, will be published in Se …
Bumi Thomas: the Glasgow-born singer given two weeks to leave the country During lockdown, UK jazz artist Bumi Thomas has found space to spread out in her local park. “I take my guitar and howl,” she laughs. “I love it!” As …
Crime fiction boom as book sales rocket past 2019 levels Britain’s readers have been emerging from lockdown to restock their bookshelves, with book sales – and particularly crime novels – booming in the thre …
Crime-fighting Australian pigeons take flight to Hollywood with help from James Corden Summary: The humble pigeon may be an unlikely breed of star but an author-illustrator duo from Melbourne have been turning the birds into a crime-fighting trou …
Dear NHS, edited by Adam Kay – celebrities say thank you Summary: In 2018 Daisy May Cooper, who writes and stars in the BBC comedy This Country, was recovering in hospital after giving birth to her first baby, Pip, b …
August by Callan Wink review – coming of age in rural America August, the eponymous hero of Callan Wink’s debut novel, receives his fair share of unwanted advice. Mostly from other men, mostly about women. He doe …
Rowling, Rushdie and Atwood warn against ‘intolerance’ in open letter Summary: JK Rowling, Salman Rushdie and Margaret Atwood are among the signatories to a controversial open letter warning that the spread of “censoriousness” is …
Sonic Youth, Desolation Center 1985: 500 tabs of acid, one life-changing gig In 1983, 20-year-old promoter Stuart Swezey was sick of his gigs getting shut down by Los Angeles cops. On a road trip across Mexico he had an epiphan …
Kanye West takes anti-vaccine, anti-abortion stance in US presidential bid Kanye West has given more details about the policy platform he will adopt in his bid to become US president in November, declaring himself anti-aborti …
Johnny Mandel obituary A brief survey of the career highlights of Johnny Mandel, who has died aged 94, might pick out his composition of the song Suicide Is Painless, the th …
Ja Ja Ding Dong! How schlager found its joyful place in the pop camp Summary: At the beginning of the new Netflix movie Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga, aspiring musicians Lars (Will Ferrell) and Sigrit (Rachel M …
Brahms: where to start with his music This series began last week with Beethoven. Among the composers who took up the daunting challenge of the symphonic form, none was more aware of the l …
No flip-flops, no hoodies: was Jess Glynne wrong to complain about Sexy Fish's dress code? Name: Sexy Fish. Age: Four. Appearance: Very smart indeed. Now, when you say Sexy Fish … I mean the London restaurant Sexy Fish, not the abstract conc …
John King obituary In 1965, my friend and colleague John King, who has died aged 77, co-founded with the distinguished baroque trumpeter Don Smithers the Oxford Pro Musi …
The Disaster Tourist by Yun Ko-eun review – life under late capitalism Following a spate of recent fiction considering the strange intersection of our work and leisure lives – novels such as Ling Ma’s apocalyptic satire S …
Rewild Yourself by Simon Barnes review – how to get closer to nature In CS Lewis’s Voyage of the Dawn Treader, Lucy reads out a spell for revealing hidden things. Inspired by this idea, nature writer Simon Barnes offers …
What I learned from preparing for the end of the world It’s a glorious June afternoon and as I dig up turf to make a vegetable bed, I’m listening to extracts from parson-naturalist Gilbert White’s diary. W …
The Streets: None of Us Are Getting Out of This Life Alive review – from lad to dad Cast your mind back to the summer of 2004. Mike Skinner – that then-rarest of things, a British rapper who had found not only a uniquely British voice …
Zara McFarlane's dream festival: Koffee and herbal tea Location It would have to be in Jamaica, but not on the beach as people might expect. I’m thinking of a hillside, country spot, with a winding river y …
Solitude review – loneliness or reverie? Intense songs with lockdown resonance Summary: Four kinds of solitude are here explored by the tenor James Gilchrist and pianist Anna Tilbrook – and it’s safe to say it carries far greater resonanc …
Daniel Barenboim: 'If I could never conduct a live Ring cycle again, I don't know what I would do' It takes more than a global pandemic to stop Daniel Barenboim. The pianist and conductor is not merely one of the modern world’s pre-eminent musicians …
The Australian book to read next: My Father's Moon by Elizabeth Jolley It is proof of a fine novel when its characters enter your spirit as you are reading and take up residence there. The experience is akin to falling in …
Utopia Avenue by David Mitchell review – a musical journey David Mitchell’s eighth novel, Utopia Avenue, arrives both as a distinct and distinctive book, and as a further chapter in the ongoing “metanovel” tha …
Donna Missal: Lighter review – progressive torch singer sounds strangely retro New Jersey singer-songwriter Donna Missal has supported both King Princess and Lewis Capaldi on tour, and fans of both will find something to enjoy in …
Female Husbands by Jen Manion review – a trans history Jen Manion’s new book is a detailed, synoptic history of a fascinating dimension of 18th- and 19th-century cultural history in Britain and the US: it …
George Alagiah: 'Steinbeck taught me the power of words' Summary: The book I’m currently reading I’m having chemotherapy at the moment and I find it difficult to concentrate. When I read, it has to be in short bursts …
Lady Antebellum sue black singer Lady A over name change The US country group Lady A – known until recently as Lady Antebellum, before changing their name to shed its slavery-era connotations – is suing the …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Big Boi, the Chicks, Kanye West Big Boi & Sleepy Brown Can’t Sleep Smoove. And I use the term advisedly, because this sounds like Trevor Nelson’s record of the week from 2003. A simp …
Amy Winehouse, Glastonbury 2004: coaxing rainbows from the clouds It was Glastonbury, so it was raining. It wasn’t the deluge of the day before, which had reduced the main field to a mud bath for Paul McCartney’s hea …
The best recent science fiction, fantasy and horror The prolific Stephen Graham Jones has written more than 20 books in as many years, and his latest, The Only Good Indians (Titan, £8.99), combines lite …
Pop Smoke: five arrested in connection with Brooklyn rapper's killing Summary: Five people have been arrested in connection with the death of Brooklyn rapper Pop Smoke. The 20-year-old artist, born Bashar Jackson, was shot dead i …
John Poole obituary My husband, John Poole, who has died aged 86, was director of the BBC Singers for nearly 20 years. Under his leadership they earned a reputation as on …
Eminem criticises non-mask wearers on new rap track Summary: Eminem has entered the debate about face masks in a collaboration with Kid Cudi, tackling an issue that is the subject of fierce disagreement in the U …
Paul Weller joins Lennon and McCartney with No 1 albums in five straight decades Paul Weller has joined John Lennon and Paul McCartney as the only artists to top the UK album chart in five consecutive decades. Weller said he was “v …
San Cisco, Mo'Ju, Alex the Astronaut and more: Australian music for isolated times As some states around Australia begin to slowly open back up and Victoria heads back into shutdown, Australia’s arts industry is still largely dormant …
'A self-centered publicity stunt': just how serious is Kanye West's presidential bid? Once the strangest of bedfellows, Kanye West and Donald Trump are now officially rivals. On the Fourth of July, the California-based rapper and entrep …
British Summer Time Begins by Ysenda Maxtone Graham review – what school summer holidays were like In 1966, John Mullan begged his parents for a foreign holiday after a school friend went, with his family, to Majorca for the summer: “My mother shook …
Michaela Coel plays the first on-screen writer I can relate to Michaela Coel’s critically acclaimed new TV series I May Destroy You (BBC One), the journey of a young woman uncovering and trying to deal with sexual …
Vernon Subutex 3  by Virginie Despentes review – the trilogy concludes When the first volume in the punk-feminist writer Virginie Despentes’s Vernon Subutex trilogy appeared in English in 2015, it was a cause for exciteme …
Out of office: has the homeworking revolution finally arrived? Summary: Ever since the arrival of broadband in the early 2000s, people have been predicting a revolution in homeworking. The revolution always felt oversold t …
Charlie Kaufman: 'Making people laugh makes me feel validated as a human' When Charlie Kaufman was seven years old, he knew what he wanted to be when he grew up. He knows because he went as far as to write it down. “Actor, d …
Rise up: the best books about the power of protest The same day that the youth of Bristol tore down the statue of Edward Colston, a crowd of 10,000 surrounded the statue of the barbaric King Léopold II …
Classical home listening: Voces8, the Hermes Experiment and Llŷr Williams • After Silence by Voces8 (Voces8 Records), directed by Barnaby Smith, wasn’t devised for the state we are in but might well have been. This wide-rang …
One to watch: Oscar Jerome The UK jazz underground is still on pause, with live music venues remaining closed, but a fixture on that once-bubbling scene is 27-year-old Oscar Jer …
Callum Au and Claire Martin: Songs and Stories review – Claire Martin in big band shock Considering that she has sung duets with Richard Rodney Bennett, appeared around the world with bands of every shape and size, and with many of today’ …
Nicola Barker: 'If I have a life philosophy, it's ferocious innocence' Nicola Barker is the author of 13 novels, including the Booker-shortlisted Darkmans (2007) and the Goldsmiths prize-winning H(a)ppy (2018). Her work i …
Beethoven: A Life in Nine Pieces by Laura Tunbridge – review A book about the most famous composer in the western canon, a “dead white male” at that, isn’t an obvious place to look for insights into our current …
The Streets: None of Us Are Getting Out of This Life Alive review – a banging return For years, Mike Skinner has been living his best post-superstar life – DJ-ing regularly, raising small Streets. But nearly a decade on from his two 20 …
Lianne La Havas: 'It's hard to fit in when you have two heritages' Lianne La Havas arrives on her bike, a sturdy looking affair with a wicker front basket. It’s a June morning in Brockwell Park, south London, and the …
Rufus Wainwright: Unfollow the Rules review – a return to sumptuous basics After almost a decade working in other fields – most notably on his second opera and a project putting Shakespeare’s sonnets to music – Rufus Wainwrig …
In brief: The Peer and the Gangster; Tennis Lessons; To Calais, in Ordinary Time – review The Peer and the Gangster Daniel Smith The History Press, £20, pp256 The story of the gangster Ronnie Kray’s entanglement with the flamboyant politici …
Anne Applebaum: how my old friends paved the way for Trump and Brexit Anne Applebaum can look at the wreck of democratic politics and understand it with a completeness few contemporary writers can match. When she asks wh …
The Chicks: Gaslighter; Margo Price: That's How Rumors Get Started – review Country music – a genre steeped in stories of poverty, perseverance and righteous female ire – has long had a progressive wing. But few artists have p …
Culture in the Third Reich by Moritz Föllmer review – when fascism stole the show Even before the Nazis seized power in Germany in 1933, they had placed their tanks on the battlefield of the imagination. “Event culture” with darker …
Pilgrims by Matthew Kneale review – witty, thoughtful medieval tales Summary: Twenty years after his bold and original novel English Passengers won the Whitbread prize, Matthew Kneale has returned to similar territory with Pilgr …
Poem of the week: The Sparrows of Butyrka by Irina Ratushinskaya The Sparrows of Butyrka Now even the snow has grown sad – Let overwhelmed reason go, And let’s smoke our cigarettes through the air-vent, Let’s at lea …
L7, Reading 1992: riffs, mud fights and a flying bloody tampon It might seem a bit much that the festival moment I wish I’d witnessed was a bloodied tampon being flung into a baying crowd. But, as anyone who has w …
Women speak out about Warren Ellis: 'Full and informed consent was impossible' ‘Stories are what make us human,” comics writer Warren Ellis told an audience on 28 April 2005, as that year’s Toronto Comic-Con began. “They’re an ad …
Juice WRLD: Legends Never Die review – patron saint of the melancholy masses Summary: Juice WRLD’s posthumous album opens with the devil closing in. On Conversations, the rapper is avoiding a tête-à-tête with the arch fiend himself, a m …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start on a cheerful note from Magrat123, who …
Michael Glickman obituary Summary: For the last three decades of his life, Michael Glickman, who has died aged 78, was fascinated by crop circles, the patterns that appear unobserved an …
The Liar's Dictionary by Eley Williams review – a glorious way with words I don’t know if any of the newspaper fiction previews that appeared at the end of 2016 tipped Eley Williams’s first collection, Attrib. and Other Stor …
I am not reading. I am not writing. This is not normal Summary: Time to finally finish Proust, read poetry, make things, learn a language, focus, concentrate. So many opportunities present themselves. What have I d …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup A Double Life Charlotte Philby Borough Press, £12.99, pp464 Charlotte Philby’s book is about choices, the ones we make and the ones we ignore. “How ea …
Brandy: ‘Music is my therapy. I don’t know what life would be without it’ When Brandy Norwood was 14 she went to see her idol Whitney Houston in concert. Stuck in the nosebleed seats, she decided to blag her way backstage at …
White Teeth seemed fresh and hopeful in 2000 – how does it read now? Zadie Smith’s White Teeth, the back of my copy explains, is about “the tricky way the past has of coming back and biting you on the ankle”. A statemen …
Peter Goodwin obituary My friend Peter Goodwin, who has died aged 94, was for many years a leading figure in the classical music scene in High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. As …
Remain in Love by Chris Frantz review – the Talking Heads drummer speaks out A winter afternoon, Providence, Rhode Island, 1973. Tina Weymouth and Chris Frantz are art students and madly in love. They’re working on their painti …
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Womad 1985: the qawwali star invokes rapture Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan’s voice is quite unlike any other. At turns heavy and hulkingly powerful, yet also nimble and pointedly precise, his vocalisatio …
The Number Bias by Sanne Blauw review – how numbers can mislead us Summary: The old saw that there are “lies, damned lies and statistics” is attributed to various figures, but was already considered proverbial in 1890 – perhap …
Top 10 books about recovery Summary: When we hear the word “recovery”, especially alongside “literature”, we tend to think of books on alcoholism or drug addiction. But humans recover fro …
The Great Gatsby prequel set for release days after copyright expires Nick Carraway, last seen at the end of The Great Gatsby contemplating the futility of trying to move beyond our past, is set to reveal a little more o …
Mervyn Peake 'visual archive' acquired by British Library From a sketch of a scheming Steerpike in Gormenghast to one of Jim Hawkins alone on the shore of Treasure Island, more than 300 original illustrations …
Susan Shaw obituary Summary: In 1970 the price of lead went through the roof, and the art, craft and industry of letterpress printing, essentially unchanged for five centuries, be …
'The nearest to God we get': stars pick the Beethoven work they cherish ‘Breathtaking and indispensible’ Alan Hollinghurst, author Beethoven is a master of compaction and urgency, and more than any other composer he writes …
The Wondrous and Tragic Life of Ivan and Ivana by Maryse Condé review – a scurrilous picaresque The Wondrous and Tragic Life of Ivan and Ivana is a rollicking, rumbustious and slyly mischievous Candide for our times. Set in Guadeloupe, Mali and F …
Why We Drive by Matthew Crawford review – a high-speed reverse into nostalgia Maurice Gatsonides was one of the world’s first professional rally drivers. He won the 1953 Monte Carlo rally, but made his fortune and his name with …
Protomartyr: Ultimate Success Today review – predictive texts for a world in chaos Summary: Detroit quartet Protomartyr recorded their fifth album last year. Not, at first sight, the most fascinating piece of information about Ultimate Succes …
Notting Hill Carnival 2020: details announced for online version Summary: Details have been announced for 2020’s Notting Hill Carnival, which will take place online amid the coronavirus pandemic. The event usually attracts m …
Eighth Blackbird: Singing in the Dead of Night review – irresistible, propulsive variations Summary: It’s more than 30 years now since composers, Julia Wolfe, Michael Gordon and David Lang founded the new-music collective Bang on a Can, which through …
Manchester music venues Gorilla and the Deaf Institute to permanently close Summary: Four celebrated music venues in Manchester and Hull are to close due to financial difficulties brought about by the coronavirus pandemic. In Mancheste …
Judy Dyble obituary Judy Dyble, who has died aged 71, was the first female singer with the English folk-rock pioneers Fairport Convention. She was already singing in nort …
The Australian book you should read next: Too Much Lip by Melissa Lucashenko When Melissa Lucashenko won the Miles Franklin award last year, some readers and critics considered her book Too Much Lip undeserving. She tells a goo …
Munroe Bergdorf receives landmark book deal for gender manifesto The first book by Munroe Bergdorf, a manifesto on gender by the black transgender activist and model, has been bought for a six-figure sum after a bid …
The Pull of the Stars by Emma Donoghue review – fighting the 1918 flu pandemic This must be the only book this year whose publication date has moved forward, from autumn to midsummer, and that is because it’s set in a Dublin hosp …
The Chicks: Gaslighter review – former Dixies dish on divorce The band formerly known as the Dixie Chicks are getting with the programme. Last month, after 30 years in the business, the Texas trio decided to drop …
Shirley Collins: Heart's Ease review – the voice of a benevolent God Heart’s Ease is a wild flower that self-seeds and grows tall alone. The cadences of the phrase also suit Shirley Collins in the present, and there is …
From Bob Dylan to Viv Albertine: 10 of the best music biographies Clothes, Clothes, Clothes. Music, Music, Music. Boys, Boys, Boys by Viv Albertine (Faber & Faber, 2014) A no-nonsense sojourn through Albertine’s life …
Eddie Gale, jazz trumpeter and Blue Note star, dies aged 78 Eddie Gale, the free jazz trumpeter with two celebrated albums on the Blue Note label, has died aged 78. His wife confirmed to the New York Times that …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Evil, Shirley Collins, Sufjan Stevens Evil A Child Shamed Melding Appalachian roots with wispy cloud rap and crunchy studio glitches, Evil comes over not just as a banjo-twanging pal of Am …
Hunting for mountweazels: Eley Williams on the fun - and responsibility - of dictionaries Eley Williams has always loved dictionaries. That love shone throughout her dazzling, acrobatic 2017 collection, Attrib. and Other Stories, which savo …
The best recent crime and thrillers – review roundup Summary: Not a linear plot but a series of vignettes, Nothing Can Hurt You by Nicola Maye Goldberg (Raven, £12.99) is a superbly unsettling account of the afte …
Andrea Corr: ‘There was a suggestion of yodelling, but not full yodelling!’ In 2000, the Corrs were unstoppable. The Irish siblings welcomed the millennium performing at the UK’s flagship Dome itself and finally converted thei …
Shifting gears: how does a literary festival become a drive-in event? Booklovers at the Appledore book festival this September will not be able to subject their favourite authors to the usual detailed questioning after a …
Opening night of the virtual Proms – archive treasures and a trite mash-up When lockdown began in March and one-by-one the summer music and opera festivals began dropping off the calendar, the self-styled “world’s greatest mu …
Shadow State by Luke Harding review – an impassioned indictment of the Kremlin Its assassins stalk the streets of western towns and cities; its online troll farms poison the political bloodstream of democracies; its hackers force …
Short and sweet: the best stories to read right now Marcel Proust’s brother said the problem with In Search of Lost Time was that people “have to be very ill or have a broken leg” in order to read it. O …
Black Lives Matter, grandma and me: how our world changed during lockdown Summary: It is Saturday 13 June 2020 and the world is on fire. I’m sitting with my grandma, Esther, in her living room in south London for the first time in th …
Classical home listening: a good week for tenor-piano recitals • Six songs to a distant beloved – separated by blue mountain and misty valley – comprise An die ferne Geliebte, usually reckoned the first song cycle …
The Chicks: ‘We were used and abused by everybody who wanted to make money off us’ When the Dixie Chicks signed to Sony in 1995, the label worried that their name was politically incorrect. At the time, the bosses were more concerned …
One to watch: Christian Lee Hutson Some say nostalgia is wasted on the young, but that doesn’t stop it being a good subject for songs. Jackson Browne wrote These Days, the 1967 classic …
On my radar: Moses Boyd on his cultural highlights A breakout star of the new London jazz scene, Moses Boyd was born in Catford, south-east London, in 1991. He started playing drums at 13, and a few ye …
'Our collective imagination could die away': Stewart Lee and Shirley Collins in conversation “I was all right until this week, but now I’ve started swearing at inanimate objects.” Stewart Lee – comedian on lockdown and heavily bearded columnis …
Oumou Sangaré: Acoustic review – when less is magnificently more Unplugged sessions have fallen from favour since their 1990s heyday, but here Mali’s leading diva reminds us that sometimes they can eclipse plugged-i …
Kit de Waal: 'As soon as you introduce a talking horse, I'm just not interested' Summary: Kit de Waal is a novelist and short-story writer. Her debut novel, My Name Is Leon, was shortlisted for the Costa first novel award while her second, …
Alice Ivy, Tkay Maidza, Paul Kelly and more: Australian music for isolated times As some states around Australia begin to slowly reopen and Victoria slogs it out back in shutdown, Australia’s arts industry is still largely dormant …
Remain in Love by Chris Frantz  review – once in a lifetime with Talking Heads Talking Heads were the most innovative and among the most successful of the post-punk bands. I considered them a sort of postmodern Rolling Stones, in …
Revealed: how a Parisian sex worker stole the heart of poet EE Cummings He was one of the 20th century’s most famous American poets and she was a Parisian sex worker. Now previously unpublished letters written by EE Cummin …
Natasha Trethewey: 'I decided I was going to be the one to tell my mother's story' Natasha Trethewey was the US poet laureate from 2012 to 2014. Her Pulitzer prize-winning work highlights the racial and historical inequities of Ameri …
The Pretenders: Hate for Sale review – every song could be a single Blessed with an evergreen voice and an unimpeachable melodic ear, Chrissie Hynde – the keeper of one of the finer catalogues in rock – has been churni …
Mary-Kay Wilmers: 'At Faber, TS Eliot was referred to as the GLP – Greatest Living Poet' Mary-Kay Wilmers, who celebrates her 82nd birthday today, is, according to the New York Times, “Britain’s most influential editor”. She was one of the …
Miss Benson’s Beetle by Rachel Joyce review – self-discovery in the South Pacific Since her 2012 bestselling debut The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry, Rachel Joyce has specialised in stories about overlooked people jolted out of …
Lianne La Havas: Lianne La Havas review – purposeful, tender and bold While Leanne La Havas’s previous albums – 2012’s acoustic-led Is Your Love Big Enough? and 2015’s neo-soul dabbling Blood – had their moments, they ne …
In brief: The Family Clause; Anti-Social; My Name Is Why – review Summary: The Family Clause Jonas Hassen Khemiri Harvill Secker, £16.99, pp320 A man dreads the arrival of his critical, overbearing father, but a family agreem …
'Our sound engineer got a death threat': how lesbian label Olivia shook up music It’s the kind of smooth soul groove you can imagine hearing on California FM radio in the late 70s. Bright strings dance over sparkling Fender Rhodes …
God, abortion and better acoustics: Kanye West launches campaign with chaotic rally Kanye West has launched his campaign tour for the US presidential election in chaotic fashion at an event in Charleston, South Carolina, delivering a …
Why Didn't You Just Do What You Were Told? by Jenny Diski review – supremely sharp Summary: When the novelist Jenny Diski was diagnosed with cancer, she wrote in an essay in the London Review of Books (A Diagnosis) that her first feeling was …
Green shoots: the best books to inspire hope for the planet Everyday life has been upended by the pandemic, but the Arctic heatwave is a reminder that the climate crisis still poses an urgent threat to humanity …
Modern Times by Cathy Sweeney – twisted fables from a new talent As the first lines of short story collections go, it’s pretty hard to beat the one that opens Modern Times, the debut of Irish writer Cathy Sweeney: “ …
Emitt Rhodes, influential US psych-pop musician, dies aged 70 Emitt Rhodes, the cult US musician who helped shape the powerpop genre, has died aged 70. His death was confirmed by Tony Blass, who produced a 2009 d …
Poem of the week: On First Knowing You’re a Teacher by Peter Kahn On First Knowing You’re a Teacher Robert’s not coming in, my boss tells me. I’m sitting sweating in a windowless office, a stack of résumés eye-ballin …
Beyoncé unveils trailer for Disney+ visual album Black is King Beyoncé has released a trailer for her new visual album, Black is King, which aims to promote “the beauty of tradition and black excellence”. The film …
Dance music star the Black Madonna changes name due to racial insensitivity The successful American DJ and producer the Black Madonna has changed her name to the Blessed Madonna, following a petition for her to change it on gr …
Not the Booker prize 2020: nominate your favourite book of the year The Not the Booker prize is back – again! It feels great to write those words. After all we’ve been going through, it’s all the more astonishing the a …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Summary: Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. “I’ve just finished and enjoyed Fresh Water For Fl …
An author bought his own book to get higher on bestseller lists. Is that fair? For any author, being able to describe yourself as a bona fide bestseller is key to conferring your career with a certain gravitas – and will often br …
Q magazine's demise signals the end of the old music press Summary: It seems a strange comparison to make, but in its initial incarnation at least, Q magazine was as much a product of its era as Oz and the Internationa …
Josephine Cox, bestselling novelist of family sagas, dies at 82 Josephine Cox, the proflic author who grew up in poverty in Blackburn and went on to sell millions of copies of her family dramas, has died at the age …
'Completely surreal': Jess Cornelius on releasing an album – and having a baby – at the same time At 12am the night before releasing her new single, Los Angeles-based New Zealand musician Jess Cornelius felt her water break. The baby was coming two …
Nicki Minaj announces she's pregnant with her first child Summary: Nicki Minaj is pregnant with her first child. The rapper posted three images on Instagram, one featuring the caption “#Preggers” and another reading: …
Too Much and Never Enough by Mary L Trump review – a scathing takedown of Uncle Donald Like America, Trump claims to be unique, exceptional, a shining self-creation. This book by his estranged niece demolishes that myth. Mary Trump’s rut …
How does a young writer pay the rent? There is a fact about me I’ve been known to trot out in smart company for the purposes of gaining the upper hand: I won a place at Oxford to do my DPh …
Chris Frantz: 'If you knew David Byrne, you would not be jealous of him' David Byrne overwhelms the image of Talking Heads. With his herky-jerky mannerisms, loopy persona and arch lyrics – not to mention his command of the …
Tiwa Savage: the Nigerian pop star fighting the country's rape crisis Summary: In the quest to find a perfect spot for her router, Tiwa Savage has to disrupt her four-year-old son Jamil’s TV time. He puts up a mild protest but so …
How White Teeth transcends its many flaws Famously, Zadie Smith sold White Teeth for £250,000 on the back of an 80-page-extract. She once told the story on the BBC’s World Book Club: “I’d writ …
Reni Eddo-Lodge and Emma Watson to redraw London tube map with women's names Summary: Londoners Reni Eddo-Lodge and Emma Watson are spearheading a project to reimagine the city’s iconic tube map, by renaming all 270 stops after the wome …
'It had that spiky sense of humour': your memories of Q magazine The closure of music magazine Q has been described as signalling the final passing of the industry’s traditional press, as the coronavirus pandemic co …
Book sales hit record highs in 2019, but publishers ‘now need help’ Book sales in the UK hit record levels in 2019, driven by a surge in audiobook and nonfiction titles, according to new figures released as publishers …
Sing into the funnel please: inside the Covid-19 lab hoping to declare singing safe Declan Costello, an ear, nose and throat surgeon with an interest in voice disorders and a side career as a tenor, is looking back on the year. “Six m …
Owls of the Eastern Ice by Jonathan C Slaght review – an extraordinary quest Jonathan Slaght has the best author photograph I’ve ever seen. Pale, bearded, dressed in black, he gazes at the camera with forbidding intensity. Behi …
Goran Bregović, Guča 2007: 100,000 people in Balkan brass ecstasy A small town in the rolling hills of central Serbia is an unlikely setting for one of Europe’s wildest music festivals, but across five days in early …
Stravinsky: where to start with his music Of the composers who spearheaded modernism in music at the beginning of the 20th century, it has been Igor Stravinsky (1882-1971) whose influence has …
Tim Smith, frontman of cult band Cardiacs, dies aged 59 Tim Smith, frontman with cult British band Cardiacs, has died aged 59. The news was confirmed by his bandmate Kavus Torabi. Another band representativ …
Four-year-old lands book deal for his 'astonishing' poetry Keats’s first book of poetry was published when he was 21; Mary Shelley was 18 when she started writing Frankenstein. But both of their youthful achie …
Author loses spot in Top 10 after buying 400 copies of his own book Summary: Author Mark Dawson has lost his Top 10 position in the Sunday Times bestseller charts for his thriller The Cleaner after revealing that he bought 400 …
Annie Ross, British-American jazz singer and actor, dies aged 89 Summary: Annie Ross, the British singer who became globally famous with jazz vocal trio Lambert, Hendricks & Ross and had a varied acting career, has died aged …
Eliza Clark: 'I'm from Newcastle and working class. To publishers, I'm diverse' The dedication in Eliza Clark’s Boy Parts sets the tone for the tale that follows: “For my mother and father. Please don’t read this.” The novel, a de …
Cardiacs' Tim Smith: a one-man subculture who inspired total devotion If Tim Smith influenced you, he really influenced you. His legacy following his death aged 59 might be small in the wider realm of pop, but for many o …
Kim Kardashian requests compassion for Kanye West's bipolar disorder Kim Kardashian West has spoken for the first time about her husband Kanye West’s bipolar disorder after he posted and deleted a string of erratic twee …
Murder on the Middle Passage by Nicholas Rogers review – slavery and the British empire You are trapped in a net cast by a white man reeking of rum and smoke, and then dragged miles to the coast. You are processed, bound into chains, and …
The Liar’s Dictionary by Eley Williams review – big ideas in a minor key Eley Williams won prizes and delighted readers with Attrib. and Other Stories (2017), a collection in which dazzled celebrations of love were insepara …
Mercury prize 2020: where are the albums dragged from the fringes? The Mercury music prize has caused controversy before – over everything from representation to Slowthai appearing on stage brandishing an effigy of Bo …
Mercury prize 2020: Stormzy, Dua Lipa and Michael Kiwanuka among nominees Summary: Stormzy, Dua Lipa, Laura Marling and Michael Kiwanuka are among the artists competing for 2020’s Mercury prize, arguably the most prestigious award in …
Jessy Lanza: All the Time review – a bright star in pop's outer galaxies Last week, Jessy Lanza livestreamed a performance-slash-DJ set. Nothing unusual in that, of course. You currently can’t move for artists, producers an …
Taylor Swift announces surprise album, Folklore, with the National and Bon Iver Taylor Swift has announced the surprise release of her eighth album, Folklore. The Grammy-winning songwriter produced and co-wrote much of the album a …
Elton John’s ex-wife tells court she changed identity to shed ties to singer Sir Elton John’s ex-wife Renate Blauel adopted a new identity and went into hiding in a British village in an attempt to shed her connection to the si …
Nick Cave: Idiot Prayer review – livestreamed gig is not just solo, but starkly alone In pre-pandemic times, a concert such as Nick Cave’s Idiot Prayer would have been called a solo show. Not so this one, filmed by Oscar-nominated cinem …
Alanis Morissette: 'Without therapy, I don't think I'd still be here' In the video for her new single, Reasons I Drink, Alanis Morissette appears in a group addiction meeting. The song, set to stabbing piano, traces the …
The Crown in Crisis by Alexander Larman review – abdication, assassination and the Nazis It says something about how close the abdication of 1936 has come to slipping from living memory that Alexander Larman feels obliged to plant broad re …
Maria Schneider Orchestra: Data Lords review – digital dystopia in jazz When Maria Schneider led her long-running jazz orchestra in a 2015 London performance of that year’s release The Thompson Fields, the great American c …
Children’s books roundup – the best new picture books and novels Homeschool may be out for the summer, but there’s new reading aplenty. For nine-plus, Victoria Jamieson, award-winning author-illustrator of Roller Gi …
Kamaal Williams: Wu Hen review – jazz-soul revivalist's fitful return Summary: Coming to prominence in 2016 as one half of jazz duo Yussef Kamaal, producer and pianist Kamaal Williams spearheaded the London-based revival of the g …
Emma Donoghue: 'Wooster’s sweetly foolish flippancy is just the tonic for Covid-19 times' The book I am currently reading James Meek’s To Calais, In Ordinary Time is an absolute dazzler of a story about folk highborn and low about to encoun …
'Free speech has never been freer': Pankaj Mishra and Viet Thanh Nguyen in conversation Pankaj Mishra: Black Lives Matter has forced a long overdue re-examination, from the perspectives of history’s long-term losers, of everything, not on …
‘Please don’t take my man’: Dolly Parton and Jolene’s enduring legacy Of the quirkiest pop tropes, such as saying hello from the other side, being the baaaad guy and, of course, there being absolutely no party like an S …
Wiley posts antisemitic tweets, likening Jews to Ku Klux Klan Wiley, the chart-topping grime rapper and producer, has made antisemitic comments on Twitter, including a statement that places Jews alongside the Ku …
Manuscript shows how Truman Capote renamed his heroine Holly Golightly The final typescript for Breakfast at Tiffany’s, on which Truman Capote scratched out his original choice for the name of his heroine, Connie Gustafso …
English music venues to receive £2.25m in emergency pandemic aid Culture secretary Oliver Dowden has announced plans to save around 150 grassroots music venues from insolvency while cashflow is limited for venues sh …
Fontaines DC: ‘There’s the great lie of the rock star who doesn’t care what people think’ You tend to know what to expect from the blurb that accompanies a band’s new album. There will almost certainly be talk of a “journey” or an “evolutio …
Why a generation is choosing to be child-free When I think that it won’t hurt too much, I imagine the children I will not have. Would they be more like me or my partner? Would they have inherited …
Emperors of the Deep by William McKeever review – how sharks are misunderstood America’s fear of sharks began in the summer of 1916. During a 10-day period four people were killed in the sea off New Jersey and one seriously injur …
Gabriel Bergmoser: 'There is a brand of country Australian masculinity that is particularly threatening' Gabriel Bergmoser’s debut adult novel, The Hunted, is dark as all get-out, an Australian horror-thriller that manages to combine Wolf Creek, The Hills …
Classical home listening: Mozart, mambo, Miss Julie and more Summary: • Cuban musicians have an ability to switch from classical to jazz to salsa with a chameleon versatility the rest of us can only envy. No boundaries, …
Police investigate grime artist Wiley's antisemitic tweets Police are investigating after the grime artist Wiley posted a tirade of antisemitic comments on Twitter and Instagram. The musician has been dropped …
Idiot Prayer: Nick Cave Alone at Alexandra Palace review – utterly magnetic A few weeks ago, in the vast, empty expanse of the West Hall in London’s Alexandra Palace, Nick Cave sat alone at a piano and sang 21 songs from acros …
Peter Green: Fleetwood Mac co-founder dies aged 73 Tributes have been paid to Fleetwood Mac co-founder Peter Green after he died “peacefully in his sleep” aged 73. A statement from Swan Turton solicito …
Bryan Washington: 'My next book is a gay slacker dramedy' Bryan Washington’s 2019 debut short story collection, Lot, was winner of the Dylan Thomas prize and listed as one of Barack Obama’s favourite books of …
Peter Green: Fleetwood Mac founder and guitar hero of the British blues scene Summary: Peter Green, who has died at the age of 73, was one of the great heroes, and great casualties, of the British blues scene, back in its glory days in t …
The Yellow House by Sarah M Broom review – memoir as rich social history Sarah M Broom was once employed to tell the official story of New Orleans, of the city’s “unlikely recovery” after Hurricane Katrina, which struck on …
Peter Green: guitar pioneer who made the blues his own The occasion was as unlikely as it was unforgettable: Peter Green playing in Frome, Somerset, 10 years ago, but feels like yesterday. Peter Green, who …
Jessy Lanza: All the Time review – witching-hour jams Summary: Should you ever find yourself pondering what sort of music ghosts play in the wine bars of the underworld, fret not, for Canadian producer Jessy Lanza …
The week in classical: BBC Proms 2020 and more – review With brave face and make-do cheer, the BBC Proms 2020 launched its 125th anniversary year last weekend: not in its usual Royal Albert Hall home with a …
The Good Ancestor by Roman Krznaric – review There is much talk these days about decolonising – statues, buildings, curricula. All of that has to do with legacies of the past, but there is also a …
James Dean Bradfield: 'I'm not sure musicians telling people who to vote for helps' James Dean Bradfield was born in 1969, and brought up in the south Wales valleys. He formed the Manic Street Preachers at school in 1986 with friends …
Adrian Tomine: 'Cartoons seemed like the surest path to being a hermit' As a novelist of my acquaintance once observed, writers tend mostly to moan about their humiliations – the book signing for which no one turned up; th …
Kamaal Williams: Wu Hen review – genre-bending prodigy strikes again Street Dreams is the opening track of the second solo album from London keysman Kamaal Williams, and it could easily be the concept for the entire thi …
In brief: Signs of Life; Against the Loveless World; Inland – review Summary: Signs of Life Stephen Fabes Pursuit, £18.99, pp416 Dr Stephen Fabes was at the end of his 20s when he caught the travelling bug, a craving for “more s …
Peter Green obituary Peter Green, who has died aged 73, was one of the guitar-playing greats of 1960s blues-rock as well as a gifted songwriter. He was a founder of Fleetw …
Tade Thompson: full-time doctor who finds energy for full-on writing career After Anton Chekhov and Arthur Conan Doyle, Tade Thompson is the latest in a long line of medical doctors who have become writers. Thompson is a full- …
The Australian book you should read next: Her Father's Daughter by Alice Pung During the first lockdown, I stopped reading. The act required a receptiveness I felt incapable of giving in those early months. But some time around …
People power: the best books about the allure of crowds and community Our experience of the coronavirus pandemic has been shaped by collective behaviour. As one we followed the advice to stay at home, together we clapped …
Penguin Classics Science Fiction review  – a fresh look at brave new worlds The border between science fiction and mainstream literature is more permeable than booksellers or publishers would have us think. Double Booker prize …
Poem of the week: If I Were to Meet by Grace Nichols Summary: If I Were to Meet If I were to meet the ghost of my childhood running with slipping shoulder-straps and half-plaited hair beside a brown expanse of me …
Kraftwerk, Tribal Gathering 1997: past, present and future become one One night in 1997, in the grounds of a country house just off the M1, I watched Kraftwerk, the enigmatic Mensch-Maschine, successfully evolve. Their a …
Josephine Cox obituary Summary: Josephine Cox, who has died aged 82, could have stepped out of the pages of a novel by Catherine Cookson or Barbara Taylor Bradford. Brought up in pov …
Mike Scott of the Waterboys: how we made The Whole of the Moon Summary: Mike Scott, singer-songwriter I was in Manhattan with my girlfriend, Krista. She asked: “Is it easy to write songs?” In my 20s I hadn’t yet grown out …
Peter Graham obituary The most popular book written by the British food writer Peter Graham, who has died aged 80, was his last – an evocative account of the many meals he …
Annie Ross obituary The jazz singer Annie Ross, who has died aged 89, consistently brought the best out of good songs – and sometimes the best out of her expert admirers, …
Irenosen Okojie wins the Caine prize for 'stunning' short story Grace Jones Critically acclaimed author Irenosen Okojie has won the AKO Caine prize for African writing, crediting her win with giving her “extra confidence” as a …
Denise Johnson, singer with Primal Scream, dies aged 56 Summary: Denise Johnson, the Manchester-born singer best known for her vocals on Primal Scream’s 1991 album Screamadelica, has died aged 56. A friend of Johnso …
Hilary Mantel up for third Booker prize as 2020 longlist announced Hilary Mantel’s “masterful” conclusion to her Thomas Cromwell trilogy, The Mirror and the Light, has been longlisted for the Booker prize, putting the …
Intimations review – Zadie Smith's life under lockdown In Zadie Smith’s previous book, the experimental story collection Grand Union, the most interesting items also happened to be the least unconventional …
Drake beats Madonna's record for most US Top 10 hits Drake has beaten Madonna’s record for the highest number of Top 10 hits in US chart history. The Canadian rapper has two tracks in this week’s chart i …
How White Teeth brushes off the charge of ‘hysterical realism’ White Teeth is not only a publishing phenomenon and a historical record of British life before the new millennium, it also has a curious literary sign …
'She gold-plated songs': Denise Johnson, the voice of Manchester's dancefloors Summary: Manchester’s nostalgia industrial complex tends to privilege its white men: Joy Division and Tony Wilson are the ones to have had biopics made about t …
'Keep the dist-dance': Design Museum reopens with electronic music exhibition With the sour tang of dry ice, pounding dance music and more strobe lights in one room than are normally on the main stage of Glastonbury it may final …
Authors condemn Saudi Arabia's bid to host World Science Fiction Convention A group of more than 80 science fiction and fantasy authors are protesting at the possibility of one of the genres’ biggest conventions being held in …
Wiley's Facebook and Instagram accounts deactivated after antisemitic remarks Facebook has announced that it has deactivated Wiley’s Facebook and Instagram accounts, after the grime MC posted a series of antisemitic comments on …
Surviving Autocracy by Masha Gessen review – with Trump, there is no shared reality During the past few years of Donald Trump’s deranged presidency, if there is one writer I turn to it is Masha Gessen, whose piercing clarity is gemlik …
Scabby Queen by Kirstin Innes review – state-of-the-nation novel with a feminist heart An unpopular Tory government, a country riven by social inequality, a generation of young activists demanding change: 1990 was a defining year, with t …
Nina Simone, Montreux Jazz 1976: a difficult, unsteady return to the limelight The enduring image of Nina Simone is one of a sharp, radical, no-nonsense artist. But on stage at the Montreux Jazz festival in 1976, dressed in a for …
Madonna's Instagram flagged for spreading coronavirus misinformation Instagram has deleted a post by Madonna in which the pop star shared a coronavirus conspiracy theory with her 15 million followers. She captioned the …
Donald Trump Jr tries to tidy up his book Liberal Privilege's grammar Summary: Donald Trump Jr has quietly shifted the apostrophe in his forthcoming book’s title after being widely mocked for making a grammatical error. Trump Jr’ …
Lockdown listening: classical music and opera to stream at home Operas and concerts on demand • The Barbican’s 2013 multimedia staging of Britten’s Curlew River in St Giles’ Cripplegate is available to stream until …
Top 10 books by Charles Dickens The novels are unlike any other writer’s. People have likened them to poems, to visions, to pantomime, and they are all these things. If you want to s …
British-Japanese pop star Rina Sawayama 'ineligible' for Mercury prize The British-Japanese pop star Rina Sawayama has expressed her frustration that her debut album was ineligible for this year’s Mercury prize because sh …
Bill Davies obituary Summary: My friend and former teacher Bill Davies, who has died aged 83, was a well-known south Wales trumpeter. A founder member of the Constellation Big Band …
First George RR Martin, now Patrick Rothfuss: the curse of sequel-hungry fans Summary: In Misery, Stephen King created Annie Wilkes, a fanatical reader who becomes so upset at the ending that befalls her favourite character Misery Chasta …
As a singer in the Covid era, it's hard to accept that something I love so dearly could be deadly On the last weekend before Sydney went into lockdown in March, I was in the City Recital Hall performing Handel’s Messiah. The half empty hall gave th …
Letter: Wendy Cooling obituary Wendy Cooling was the person who drew me into the world of children’s books when she became a judge in the first Dillon’s Young Reader competition, wh …
Wiley refuses to withdraw antisemitic Twitter comments Wiley has refused to distance himself from antisemitic comments he posted on social media, after the grime artist found himself banned from both Twitt …
‘Utterly joyful’ Look Up! wins Waterstones children's book of the year Nathan Bryon and Dapo Adeola have won the Waterstones children’s book prize for their “utterly joyful” picture book about a science-loving black girl, …
Caste by Isabel Wilkerson review – a dark study of violence and power As US president in the 1830s, Andrew Jackson was a feverish advocate of “Indian removal”, the banishing of Native Americans from their ancestral homel …
'On the hoof': why the government's Covid-19 plan looks like horseplay Summary: The public accounts committee has accused the government of failing to make economic plans for a pandemic, and instead making up its response “on the …
The Mission House by Carys Davies – in EM Forster's footsteps The British have tended to view Anglo-Indian relations through misty eyes, as if the empire were some kind of love affair. Enoch Powell⁠ mused, dreami …
Bunker by Bradley Garrett review – building for the end times If you’re after a sense of the probability of crime, then the last people you ask are the police, because that’s all they see. A similar folie à deux …
Irish women writing fiction were dismissed as 'quiet'. Ireland wasn't listening Summary: Grandmother did most of her work in bed. She had a special tray with folding legs that served as a desk. She would sit up against a stack of pillows, …
Jane Parker-Smith obituary The organist Jane Parker-Smith, who has died suddenly aged 70, possessed an exceptional technique, vibrant musicality and a vivacious stage presence. …
AC/DC – their 40 greatest songs, ranked! 40. Soul Stripper (1975) In their infancy, AC/DC weren’t tied to one style. Their first Australian album even featured this intriguing example of a ki …
Rachmaninov: Preludes, Études-Tableaux, etc review – refined, fluent playing The Armenian-American pianist Sergei Babayan makes his solo debut on Deutsche Grammophon with this Rachmaninov recital. Born in 1961, he’s hardly a ne …
A Room Made of Leaves by Kate Grenville review – the untold story of an unruly woman Summary: “Do not believe too quickly!” The epigraph to A Room Made of Leaves issues a warning that resonates throughout the novel, as Kate Grenville invites th …
Headie One: 'In prison, the only thing not taken away from you is yourself' The north London district of Tottenham seems to offer up a rap icon for every generation. Hip-hop group Demon Boyz were among the first to shed Americ …
Duma: Duma review – extreme Kenyan metalheads bring doom to the dancefloor Alongside the burgeoning experimental electronic scene in east Africa is a small but committed underground of metal bands, based in Nairobi. These gro …
Dominic Fike: What Could Possibly Go Wrong review – Gen Z star surfs genres Few young artists can boast of sparking a label bidding war after releasing their debut EP through Soundcloud, or list the likes of Brockhampton, Bill …
Robin Stevens: 'We assume writing for adults is the pinnacle, but what book changed your life?' Summary: Warning: when tween readers get their hands on the final book in the Murder Most Unladylike series, published next week, they may well burst into tear …
'I find myself spiralling': the crisis facing British music venues Live music is in crisis. With no gigs since lockdown began on 23 March, most venues have seen their income drop to almost zero. The live music industr …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Yungblud, Beabadoobee, Idles Yungblud Strawberry Lipstick The personification of Gen Z screaming in your face during an all-nighter on lighter fluid, Yungblud is basically Keith F …
From arts-and-crafts to trippy animation: how pop videos have evolved during lockdown Summary: When lockdown was first announced, the world’s thoughts turned, of course, to music videos. How would artists create eye-tickling delights if camera o …
Booker prize-longlisted author Tsitsi Dangarembga arrested in Zimbabwe Tsitsi Dangarembga, the award-winning Zimbabwean novelist who was nominated for the Booker prize longlist earlier this week, was arrested on Friday am …
Where are the hotshot British male novelists? BAME authors may know Summary: After this week’s Booker prize longlist was announced, the Times asked “Where are the new male hotshot novelists?” I was expecting to see the article …
Back to life: literary museums are reopening amid uncertain future The corridors once walked by the likes of Jane Austen and the Brontë sisters have been silent for the past four months, as the museums at the homes of …
Fyre sale: US marshals auction off seized merchandise from ill-fated festival You’ve seen the Fyre Festival documentaries, read about the lawsuits, and laughed at the viral sandwich tweet – and now you can bid on the ill-fated e …
Intimations by Zadie Smith review – a wonderful essayist on the lockdown There are probably going to be a lot of lockdown books. Or maybe not: maybe as the new world becomes the new normal we’ll want to hurry forward, away …
Miss Benson's Beetle by Rachel Joyce review – the value of friendship Summary: Rachel Joyce’s wonderful 2012 debut, The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry, was about a man who walked 600 miles to see an old friend and found comfor …
Arkady Martine wins Hugo for best novel, as George RR Martin hosts online ceremony Summary: Debut author Arkady Martine has won the Hugo for best novel during a virtual ceremony hosted by George RR Martin that frequently turned deeply politic …
The Housing Lark: Sam Selvon's strikingly relevant, lesser-known classic Summary: The Lonely Londoners, Sam Selvon’s classic 1956 novel about West Indian migrants making their way in the old metropolis, ended on a blue note. Its chi …
Classical home listening: Beethoven, John Sheppard – and Komitas • Suffering from Beethoven anniversary fatigue? The British pianist Paul Lewis has the ideal tonic. His album Für Elise: Bagatelles, Opp 33, 119 & 126 …
One to watch: Billy Nomates There is currently no shortage of post-punk acts with a line in confrontational Sprechgesang. Brighton band Squid’s is absurdist and yelping. Dublin’s …
Taylor Swift: Folklore review – love and loss in lockdown Taylor Swift’s surprise eighth album, Folklore, takes 16 complex and intriguing tunes by pop’s reigning colossus and gussies them up in atmospherics a …
Andrew Oliver: No Local Stops review – a masterclass in early jazz piano If anyone is going to succeed in rescuing good music from the ghetto called “early jazz”, it will be the pianist Andrew Oliver. I wouldn’t go so far a …
DBC Pierre: 'You can be shut down from life because of one mistake' DBC Pierre is the author of seven books, including Release the Bats, a guide to writing fiction, and Vernon God Little, which won the Booker prize in …
Fontaines DC: A Hero’s Death review – sneer all you like Fontaines DC insist that A Hero’s Death is not merely “part two” to their phenomenal debut album, Dogrel (2019) and that the band “don’t belong to any …
Summer by Ali Smith review – a remarkable end to an extraordinary quartet I’m not sure I’ve ever looked forward to a book as eagerly as Ali Smith’s Summer. This is the final instalment of her seasonal quartet, a series that …
The Pull of the Stars by Emma Donoghue review – beauty amid horror Summary: Emma Donoghue’s publishers might regard it as a mixed blessing that her latest novel is set during the 1918 flu pandemic. While she can’t be faulted f …
Lana Del Rey: Violet Bent Backwards over the Grass review – poetry debut with mixed results Summary: This being Lana Del Rey, the title track of her poetry-audiobook-with-music suggests some sordid gymnastics at a garden party. Not so: the image captu …
A word in your ear… why the rise of audiobooks is a story worth celebrating When I look back on 2020, audiobooks may not be the first thing I remember, but they will occupy a prominent place in the list of crutches that proppe …
Antkind by Charlie Kaufman review – absurdism ad infinitum Antkind is the debut novel of Charlie Kaufman, the Being John Malkovich and Synecdoche, New York film-maker, and its premise is incredibly, well, Kauf …
From Black Lives Matter to Bleak House: David Lammy picks the best books about justice In 2016, the writer and lawyer Michelle Alexander said the shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, would come to be seen as a “critical turni …
Poulenc: A Biography by Roger Nichols; Poulenc: The Life in the Songs by Graham Johnson – review Imagine Roger Nichols and Graham Johnson at a dinner party, discussing the composer about whom they have each published an entertaining and learned ne …
Leon Fleisher, US pianist who lost use of his right hand, dies aged 92 Leon Fleisher, whose career as an acclaimed US concert pianist continued despite losing the use of his right hand, has died aged 92. His son Julian sa …
Hardcore pop fans are abusing critics – and putting acclaim before art The album rating system at US publication Pitchfork is one of the most silly and nerdy things in music journalism. The Guardian’s five-star system loo …
John Boyne accidentally includes Zelda video game monsters in novel John Boyne, the award-winning author of The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas, has acknowledged that a cursory Google led to him accidentally including monst …
Nolan sisters Linda and Anne both being treated for cancer Two of the Nolan Sisters, the Irish group that rose to fame in the 1970s, are being treated for cancer at the same time. Linda and Anne Nolan both beg …
Booker-longlisted author Tsitsi Dangarembga freed on bail in Zimbabwe The Booker-longlisted author Tsitsi Dangarembga has been freed on bail after her arrest during anti-corruption protests in Zimbabwe last week. The acc …
Not the Booker prize longlist: vote now to decide the 2020 shortlist We now have a Not the Booker longlist – and it’s a very, very long longlist. We have more than 200 eligible books this year, which is a record for the …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start in the American West: Willa Cather’s O …
Children's book pays tribute to 'health heroes' of Covid-19 pandemic Summary: A film-maker who cleans Covid wards after coming to Britain as a refugee. A pilot who supports NHS staff with tea and empathy. A midwife who writes ad …
House music: Flora Willson's watching and listening highlights Summary: Maybe it’s the weather, or a body clock now expecting a holiday. I’ve stayed put this week, but while new quarantine rules and local lockdowns continu …
Guardian Australia's book club: join Kate Grenville for a chat about history, fact and fiction Summary: The other day I discovered my ten-year-old googling “can I trust the internet”. He’s already frustrated by the difficulty of working out what sources …
Bland Fanatics by Pankaj Mishra review – both obscures and illuminates “What is it,” the Austro-Hungarian novelist Joseph Roth asked rhetorically in 1927, in a preface to his book The Wandering Jews, “that allows European …
Poetry book of the month: How to Fly by Barbara Kingsolver – review Whenever a novelist takes flight into poetry, one has, however unreasonably, misgivings – based on a received, under-examined idea of poetry as an exc …
Reading group: which PD James novel should we read this month? This month on the reading group, we’re going to read a book by PD James. This week marks 100 years since the birth of the writer known not only as “th …
'The narrative is we don't sell records': the black female singers uncredited by the UK industry Summary: Through soul, funk, disco and beyond, black female vocalists stood proudly on the front of record sleeves and on stages. Then, in 1989, Italian dance …
The Killers tour: serious sexual misconduct claim 'entirely unfounded' Summary: Lawyers for rock band the Killers have said they were “unable to find any corroboration whatsoever” of a report of serious sexual misconduct by the La …
Stephenie Meyer's Twilight retelling Midnight Sun comes out after 12 years Twelve years after Stephenie Meyer put Midnight Sun, her telling of the Twilight saga from vampire Edward Cullen’s perspective, “on hold indefinitely” …
'I have never stopped': Aileen Moreton-Robinson on 20 years of Talkin' Up to the White Woman When yarning with distinguished professor Aileen Moreton-Robinson, the Goenpul author of Talkin’ Up to the White Woman, your first priority is to keep …
Neil Young sues Donald Trump campaign for using his music Neil Young is suing Donald Trump’s campaign for alleged illegal usage of his music at a rally. The musician claims that Rockin’ in the Free World and …
Leon Fleisher: there's much more to the US pianist's career than tragedy Some may be tempted to describe the career of Leon Fleisher, the American concert pianist who died in Baltimore this week aged 92, as a deeply poignan …
Will the UK ever love foreign-language pop? In 2017, Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee’s huge No 1 summer hit Despacito seemed to herald a new age where the domination of the English language in weste …
Sean Hannity removes 'gobbledygook' Latin motto from book cover The Latin motto on Fox News anchor Sean Hannity’s new book has been changed after the original was described as “complete and utter gobbledygook” by a …
Making poetry optional in GCSE English literature is out of tune with the times Summary: Ofqual, the exams authority, has announced that next year schools won’t have to do all the components of English literature GCSE. Students must answer …
Throbbing Gristle, ATP 2004: a gateway to a strange other England By the winter of 2004, the Pontins holiday camp at Camber Sands had seen better days. Barely updated since its 1970s heyday, the bleak chalets, roamed …
A Traveller at the Gates of Wisdom by John Boyne review – an ambitious era-hopping epic At the heart of this quirky, ambitious and ultimately disappointing book is a very simple story. A sensitive boy grows up in the shadow of a violent f …
Two friends, both up for the Booker prize: 'We are exploring what it means to feel alien' It is rare for the debut novels on the Booker longlist to outnumber those by more established writers, but this year, at eight to five, they did. It i …
The Book in the Cathedral by Christopher de Hamel review – adventures of a manuscript sleuth On Christmas Day 1170, Thomas Becket delivered a sermon to a packed chapter house at Canterbury. His theme was the death of one his predecessors as ar …
Zoe Saldana apologises for playing Nina Simone in controversial biopic Zoe Saldana has apologised for playing Nina Simone in the 2016 biopic Nina, a casting that drew criticism from the late singer’s estate. “I should hav …
Wild swimming is booming in the pandemic: 'It is a lifelong education in facing down fear' As a kid at Jones Beach, New York, I spent a lot of time in the four feet of water at the scalloped, lacy edge of the Atlantic. I can picture the scen …
Kathleen Edwards on quitting music, falling for a conman – and her comeback When Kathleen Edwards opened Quitters coffee shop in Stittsville, Ottawa, in late 2014, customers would ask if she was the country singer. Yes, in a m …
Ethel Smyth: The Prison review – symphony for a searching soul Ethel Smyth was unusual among composers in being able to write a work called The Prison from a position of experience, but her weeks in Holloway as a …
Doorstep recitals and bespoke gigs: how classical music is adapting to the new normal Chris North, a keen concertgoer, was only a few minutes away when he heard the news. “I got off the motorbike at the Barbican, ready to walk up to LSO …
Kate Tempest announces they are non-binary, changes name to Kae The musician and poet formerly named Kate Tempest has changed their name to Kae Tempest, and announced they are non-binary. In the announcement on Ins …
The Last Migration by Charlotte McConaghy review – aching, poignant and pressing debut “The animals are dying. Soon we will be alone here.” These two short statements – declarative, understated – open The Last Migration, Australian autho …
Detail arrested: Grammy-winning producer faces 15 counts of sexual assault The Grammy award-winning music producer Detail was arrested Wednesday on more than a dozen charges of sexual assault, authorities said. The 41-year-ol …
The Museum of Whales You Will Never See  by A Kendra Greene  – review The Flemish cartographer Abraham Ortellius proposed four centuries ago that Europe, Africa and the Americas were once united, but had been torn asunde …
From Charli XCX to Taylor Swift: 10 of the best albums made in lockdown Summary: How I’m Feeling Now Charli XCX Announced on 6 April in a Zoom call with fans and released just six weeks later, Charli XCX’s fourth album of metallic …
Perry Farrell of Jane's Addiction: 'I consider myself a late bloomer' Sitting cross-legged in his garden, at 61 Perry Farrell still has a jawline so jutting it looks chiselled out of the mountains above the Sunset Strip. …
Act of Grace by Anna Krien review – a hugely impressive first novel Gerry brings a snake skin home to his mother one day, hoping to scare her. Instead she stares at it wistfully. “It must be an incredible feeling,” she …
DJ Erick Morillo charged with sexual battery after turning himself in House music DJ Erick Morillo has been arrested and charged with sexual battery. According to a report by the Florida news channel Local 10, police say …
Nadia Rose's dream festival: 'We'd search for Kim Kardashian's earrings in the sea' Summary: Location It’s got to be Bora Bora. It’s always been a dream for me to get over there. I love how secluded it is and it’s super–luxurious. I could real …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Kylie Minogue, Taylor Swift, Maroon 5 Kylie Minogue Say Something What a thorough joy it is to have Kylie back from the country music hinterlands. Say Something is a quasi-disco bop with a …
All killer, no filler: why Greatest Hits are back at the top of the album charts Chart-dominating compilations started in 1958, when Columbia Records packaged up the first smashes by Johnny Mathis as Johnny’s Greatest Hits. The lab …
Salzburg's summer festival: a triumph over adversity or reckless folly? At the performances of Richard Strauss’s opera Elektra in Salzburg this week, the scene in the auditorium was almost as alarming as the murderous psyc …
Midnight Sun by Stephenie Meyer review – dusk falls on Twilight saga Set aside the millions of copies sold, the controversies over both its sexual overtones and its lack of actual sex, and the blockbuster film franchise …
Wayne Fontana, British singer who topped US charts with Game of Love, dies aged 74 Pop singer Wayne Fontana, who scored a major transatlantic hit with The Game of Love in 1965, has died aged 74 at hospital in Stockport “with his long …
'A dangerous first step': Simon Armitage among poets to blast GCSE decision Summary: Poet laureate Simon Armitage and former children’s laureate Michael Rosen are among the top UK poets decrying the government’s decision to make poetry …
Summer by Ali Smith review – clear-sighted finale to a dazzling quartet Summary: “Summer,” says a character in Ali Smith’s new novel, “is really an imagined end. We head for it instinctually like it must mean something.” Smith’s qu …
After Wiley, I didn’t have a fight on my hands for once. Why did that feel so weird? I’ll say this for Wiley: at least he showed where the red line was. Because honestly, over the past five years, it hasn’t always been so clear to us J …
The mother load: Lisa Taddeo on parenting in a pandemic Never in my life had I been so high. I’d just given a reading in Amsterdam after which the gracious hosts of the evening took me out for drinks. Three …
Scenes of a Graphic Nature by Caroline O'Donoghue review – art, female collaboration and identity Summary: Like her debut, 2017’s Promising Young Women, Caroline O’Donoghue’s second novel has a young female protagonist; Charlie is an aspiring film-maker wit …
Burna Boy: ‘Brothers in the US have been stripped of their knowledge of self’ Burna Boy might be Africa’s biggest music star, but when he speaks, it’s hard to place exactly where he’s from. Ask him about the US, and a mid-Atlant …
'I decided the book should taste like a lime': DBC Pierre on writing Vernon God Little Writing Vernon God Little made me a crash test dummy for metaphors: bull by the horns, taking the plunge, going for broke. The job was a deliberate di …
Classical home listening: Semele at Ally Pally, Russian cello sonatas and more • Rampant with glorious music, licentious sexual adventure and gods and mortals behaving badly, Handel’s Semele has firmly established itself (after n …
National Indigenous Music Awards 2020: Baker Boy wins second artist of the year title Baker Boy has risen to the occasion at this year’s National Indigenous Music Awards, sweeping up three of the gongs available, including the coveted a …
The best recent poetry – review roundup Rachel Long’s My Darling from the Lions (Picador, £10.99), nominated for the Forward first collection prize, is alive with a breathless energy. The fo …
One to watch: Otta Otta is a Finnish-British singer-songwriter from south London whose electronic pop songs are bright, sharp and strange. On her new EP, Songbook, they …
Fontaines DC: A Night at Montrose, Dublin review – a blast of joy and disquiet Last week, Spotify founder Daniel Ek enraged musicians by stating that they would have to keep the content mills turning (“continuous engagement with …
Harry Beckett: Joy Unlimited review – a lost classic from 1975 A welcome rediscovery from 1975, with a promisingly cheerful title. Barbados-born Harry Beckett (1935-2010) had one of the most beautiful trumpet tone …
Shuggie Bain by Douglas Stuart review – lithe, revelatory debut Summary: One of several surprises in a tendentious Booker longlist was the number of debut authors selected – eight of the 13 novels are by first-timers, the l …
False Alarm by Bjorn Lomborg; Apocalypse Never by Michael Shellenberger – review Summary: It is no longer credible to deny that the average temperature around the world is rising and that other phenomena, such as extreme weather events, are …
Jarvis Cocker picks ‘Covid heroes’ for Big Issue special The former Pulp frontman Jarvis Cocker is to guest edit street newspaper the Big Issue for a special edition which, it hopes, will lead readers throug …
The Hungover Games by Sophie Heawood review – an acerbic must-read Journalist Sophie Heawood has written columns about life as a single mother and her memoir, The Hungover Games, provides the backstory. It’s a funny, …
Must I Go by Yiyun Li review – like stumbling across a cache of personal papers Seven months after Yiyun Li published her 2017 memoir of suicidal depression, Dear Friend, from My Life I Write to You in Your Life, Li’s 16-year-old …
Sarah Moss: ‘Writing about the natural world is not an optional extra' Sarah Moss’s seventh novel hits the ground running: it’s early morning in the Scottish Highlands and the runner is Justine, middle-aged mother of two …
Gillian Welch: Boots No 2: The Lost Songs, Vol 1 review – inspired outtakes from 2002 Fans of Gillian Welch and her longtime foil David Rawlings’s reimagining of early country and bluegrass are used to being patient. Until a month ago, …
Brazilian pop sensation Anitta: 'Run for president? I'm 27!' Anitta had imagined that this summer would be a break: a period in which she could record new music. It would have followed 10 years in which she beca …
Tkay Maidza: Last Year Was Weird Vol 2 review – fresh as a poolside mojito Not so long ago, outside of Oz itself, you might have thought “Australian hip-hop” and pictured Iggy Azalea whipping her blond ponytail. But down unde …
In brief: The Good Sharps; The Intoxicating Mr Lavelle; Fey's War – review Summary: The Good Sharps Hester Grant Chatto & Windus, £25, 384pp Hester Grant’s deeply researched and beguilingly written historical biography has timely reso …
Roasted badger and raisin wine: historical cookbooks reveal surprising recipes The perennial British argument over the best way to make a cup of tea dates back to at least the 17th century, when a cookbook warned that “the water …
A Saint from Texas by Edmund White review – a delicious, salacious romp Swapping notes on couture with Audrey Hepburn at a Givenchy show, the heroine of Edmund White’s A Saint from Texas bemoans resembling a “cow” next to …
The Housing Lark by Sam Selvon review – vibrant comic classic British landlords who put signs in windows in the 1950s and 60s warning “No Blacks, No Irish, No Dogs” did West Indians a favour, galvanising them int …
Poem of the week: The Ancestors by Jackie Wills The Ancestors are having a summit – they chase around the garden disturbing hens. Silver birches shake, light shudders in the branches. The ancestors …
'You've been smoking too much!': the chaos of Tony Wilson's digital music revolution It’s January 2000, and Tony Wilson is regaling me with tales of his brilliant career; how signing Joy Division, New Order and Happy Mondays to his Man …
David Nicholls: 'Gifting books feels like changing the music at someone else’s party' The book I am currently reading That Reminds Me by Derek Owusu, his tough, intense, poetic coming-of-age story. It’s demanding but powerful. The book …
Fania All-Stars, New York City 1971: salsa swaggers into the mainstream Summary: It’s the evening of 26 August 1971, and on the cramped stage of the Cheetah – a glitzy discotheque on Broadway and 53rd in Manhattan decorated in alum …
In the Summertime: how Mungo Jerry made a sweltering classic Ray Dorset, singer, songwriter I still had a day job at a laboratory when the melody for In the Summertime entered my head. The lyric took 10 minutes …
Support funds for UK authors hit by pandemic are running out Almost £1m has been given out to nearly 700 authors since the end of March, to help those facing financial crisis through the coronavirus pandemic. Bu …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Last week marked the 75th anniversary of the bombi …
House music: Andrew Clements' watching and listening highlights After the deluge of performances, from concert halls and opera houses, that was made available online in the first months of the Covid emergency, ther …
Hidden Hand review – China's true global ambitions exposed This is a remarkable book with a chilling message. The Chinese Communist party, for which dominating rural China in order to encircle its cities and w …
Bunker: Building for the End Times by Bradley Garrett review – the new doom boom When we refer to someone as having a “bunker mentality” we usually mean they are so stuck in their ways that they’re unable to look around and see the …
Leon Fleisher obituary When in his late 30s the American pianist Leon Fleisher, who has died aged 92, was struck by a mystery illness that immobilised his right hand, it loo …
Reading group: A Taste for Death by PD James is our book for August A Taste for Death by PD James has won our vote and will be our reading group choice for this month. That’s good news. James’s 1986 novel is considered …
Arctic Monkeys raise funds for at-risk Sheffield venue Leadmill Arctic Monkeys have launched a fundraising campaign to benefit the Leadmill, a historic indie music venue in their home city of Sheffield that is at r …
There are new ways to do democracy that give me hope. More voices could change everything “But Miss, why think about the future for?” the 13-year-old said. No one had ever asked me that before. I was visiting a class of year 7 students in S …
‘It’s hard to believe it when everything’s against you’: the rise of Melbourne’s African diaspora rap scene At the September 2018 launch of Melbourne rap label 66 Records at the Gasometer Hotel in Collingwood, a heaving crowd bounced under the venue’s giant …
Michael Rosen completes new book after long battle with Covid-19 Despite spending nearly seven weeks in intensive care and having to learn to walk again after contracting Covid-19, Michael Rosen has written a new bo …
Wagner: where to start with his music Of all composers, Wagner remains the most controversial. No other classical musician arouses such fanaticism, for and against. Almost all of his impor …
Top 10 books about the Grand Tour The Grand Tour was one of the defining educational experiences of the 18th century, a kind of travelling finishing school, comprising aristocratic vis …
Lashings of confusion: why a debut crime writer has found a steamy new audience Name: David Jewell. Age: 62. Appearance: Bald, gritty copper from the north-east of England. Occupation: First-time novelist and former policeman (bal …
‘George Eliot’ joins 24 female authors making debuts under their real names Middlemarch is to be published for the first time in almost 150 years under George Eliot’s real name, Mary Ann Evans, alongside 24 other historic work …
Nick Cave: 'cancel culture is bad religion run amuck' Political correctness has an “asphyxiating effect on the creative soul of a society”, according to Nick Cave, who has criticised “cancel culture” in h …
Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion's WAP should be celebrated, not scolded The release was highly anticipated. Two rap powerhouses, Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion, had united to create a mysterious single, and the internet w …
Sarathy Korwar, Flying Lotus and FKA twigs among 2020 AIM awards winners Flying Lotus, FKA twigs and Sarathy Korwar are among the winners at this year’s Independent Music awards, an event recognising artists working outside …
'Staycation': should we remain in the country or just stay home? Summary: Are you on a “staycation”? Camping supplies are running low as Britons test the delights of holiday spots within these islands, but doesn’t “staycatio …
'It's a mega year!':  book trade braces for autumn onslaught of major new titles From Richard Osman’s first crime novel to Caitlin Moran’s new memoir, almost 600 hardbacks are due to be published on 3 September in a “massive bun fi …
Time of the Magicians by Wolfram Eilenberger review – philosophy's great decade? Wolfram Eilenberger’s new book offers us a group portrait of four brilliant young philosophers in the aftermath of the first world war. His awesome fo …
Meanwhile in Dopamine City by DBC Pierre review – the evils of the internet This novel starts off annoying in one way, becomes annoying in a whole other way, and ends up as probably the most annoying book of 2020. But what did …
Sea Girls: Open Up Your Head review – yearning for the moshpit's return Summary: Of all the teenage rites of passage the pandemic has put a stop to (spontaneous snogging, hanging round shopping centres unmasked, going to school), t …
Phil Collins' greatest solo songs – ranked! 20. You’ve Been Cheatin’ (2010) It gets forgotten that above all, Phil Collins is a music fan. His last album to date, 2010’s Going Back – from which …
Mahler: Das Lied von der Erde review – Jurowski's lyrical insights power the great song symphony Most of Vladimir Jurowski’s previous Mahler recordings have been made with the London Philharmonic, taken from their concerts together at the Royal Fe …
Kate Grenville on colonist John Macarthur: 'It'd be nice to see some of those statues toppled' Kate Grenville may have featured the corrupt early colonist John Macarthur in her new work of Australian historical fiction, A Room Made of Leaves, bu …
Kokomo by Victoria Hannan review – anticipated debut lives up to the hype Victoria Hannan’s Kokomo is one of the most highly anticipated debuts of the year, after having won the 2019 Victorian premier’s literary award for an …
Magdalena by Wade Davis review – a journey down Colombia's river of dreams The Magdalena is the great arterial river of Colombia. Rising in the rugged moorlands of the Andean páramo 12,000ft above sea level, it flows northwar …
Alula Down: Postcards from Godley Moor, Summer 2020 review – a hazy lockdown in Weirdshire Lockdown albums have already been noted in pop, rock and rap, but August brings another, hazier, folkier creature to this peculiar summer. Alula Down …
A Saint from Texas by Edmund White review  – sex and spirituality In his landmark 1982 novel A Boy’s Own Story, Edmund White wondered: “What if I could write about my life exactly as it was? What if I could show it i …
Kath Bloom: Bye Bye These Are the Days review – beguiling, defiant folk It can be hard to write about Kath Bloom’s songwriting without drawing on a vocabulary that could diminish her. There is a nakedness to her writing, a …
Colombian pop star J Balvin in recovery after 'getting coronavirus bad' J Balvin, one of the world’s most-streamed pop stars, has said he contracted coronavirus and is in recovery. The Colombian vocalist, 35, revealed his …
Katy Perry: 'I've done a lot of falling flat on my face' Summary: Via a webcam into her Los Angeles home, Katy Perry slowly descends into frame, nine months pregnant with her first child. She looks like the Virgin Ma …
Tsitsi Dangarembga: 'I am afraid. There have been abductions' Four days after learning that her novel, This Mournable Body, had been longlisted for the Booker prize, Tsitsi Dangarembga found herself sitting on th …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Billie Eilish, Ava Max, Action Bronson Billie Eilish My Future Billie says her new single, a “really, really personal and special” song, was written over two days in lockdown with her broth …
Julian Bream, British classical guitarist, dies aged 87 Julian Bream, the British guitarist regarded as one of the finest exponents of the classical style, has died aged 87. The news was confirmed by his ma …
Gus Dapperton: ‘I’d put in 10,000 hours producing by the time I was 18’ Gus Dapperton emerged in 2017 as a lo-fi pop prankster with a lime-green bowl cut and videos that were somewhere between a Michel Gondry short and a Z …
Burna Boy: Twice as Tall review – fun and fury from Nigerian pop polymath For a vivid snapshot of what Burna Boy is capable of, head for track 12 of new album Twice as Tall, entitled Monsters You Made. The music is modern Af …
Is a woman my age allowed to be happy when the world is going to hell in a handbasket? Summary: I have always felt myself to be rather porous. Things affected me. Paying close attention to what was going on around me was a means of survival: I di …
'Sloppy': Baileys under fire over Reclaim Her Name books for Women’s prize Women’s prize sponsor Baileys has apologised for putting an illustration of the wrong black abolitionist on the cover of a book in a series republishi …
Stranger in the Shogun's City by Amy Stanley review – a woman's life in 19th-century Japan In 1839 a priest’s daughter called Tsuneno ran away from her village in Echigo, otherwise known as the Snow Country of north-central Japan. Her destin …
Let's celebrate Bridget Jones turning 25 – and be critical of her, too I haven’t been looked at, in real life, for a long time. We’re talking months. This all changed on Wednesday when I was filmed in Herne Hill Books, my …
Ottessa Moshfegh: 'Americans are really good storytellers and really good liars' “It is just kind of a coincidence, obviously,” Ottessa Moshfegh says of the importance of isolation in her fiction, from her home in Pasadena, Califor …
'I feel like I'm failing at life': the terrible plight of music event staff Edd Sedgwick is a sound engineer and tour manager who normally works for the Vaccines, but with that group having long planned to take 2020 off, he wa …
Classical home listening: Falla from Mexico City, Elgar from Berlin Summary: • Spanish by birth, drawn to the musical sensibilities of France, Manuel de Falla (1876-1946) combined diverse passions in his scores: from early chur …
The Killers: Imploding the Mirage review – Boss business as usual The thing that strikes you as unusual about the latest Killers album is that it sounds just like a Killers album. It’s all here: the boosterish anthem …
One to watch: Liv.e It’s a challenge for any new artist to break through at the moment, but Liv.e (the E is silent) has ingenuity on her side. The Dallas-born, LA-based a …
Vivian Gornick: ‘Thinking is the hardest thing in the world' Vivian Gornick should be used to things happening later than expected. She was 51 when she published the book that finally made her name in 1987 (Fier …
Idris Ackamoor and the Pyramids: Shaman! review – brilliant shape-shifting With Shaman!, 69-year-old bandleader and saxophonist Idris Ackamoor completes an impressive trilogy of albums since his re-emergence with 2016’s We Be …
Reaganland review: Rick Perlstein on Carter's fall and the rise of the right Despite its title, Reaganland is actually an exhaustive history of the years 1976-1980 – and thus perforce a history of the administration of Jimmy Ca …
Democracy for Sale by Peter Geoghegan review – the end of politics as we know it? As we try to face the future, we are usually fighting the last war, not the one that’s coming next. One of the most striking points the political phil …
The Flapper Queens by Trina Robbins review – a luscious curation Of all the cartoonists whose work appears in Trina Robbins’s brilliant new book, The Flapper Queens: Women Cartoonists of the Jazz Age, my favourite i …
Biffy Clyro: A Celebration of Endings review – smiley vs gnarly Written and recorded well before lockdown, the Scottish rock band’s Covid-delayed ninth album ponders life’s full stops and unforeseen handbrake turns …
The Jonathan Cape/Observer/Comica graphic short story prize 2020 – enter now! Calling all aspiring cartoonists and graphic novelists: the Jonathan Cape/Observer/Comica graphic short story prize, now in its 13th wondrous year, op …
'The god of hellfire returns!' Can Arthur Brown incinerate Covid? Summary: ‘I am the God of Hellfire!” proclaimed Arthur Brown at the start of Fire, the 1968 UK No 1 by the Crazy World of Arthur Brown, an international smash …
Matt Haig on the best books to build mental resilience Reading isn’t a solitary, introverted activity, it’s about connecting with people and the world. In times of pain and trauma that becomes even more es …
Stormzy gives £500,000 to fund scholarships for disadvantaged students Stormzy has donated £500,000 to fund educational scholarships for students from disadvantaged backgrounds as part of his commitment to becoming a majo …
Shots in the Dark by David Kynaston review – Trump haunts a troubled sporting diary The non-league football club Aldershot Town and the ominous ascension of Donald Trump don’t appear to have much in common, yet they happen to be the t …
Florence's classical ReGeneration: how one outdoor music festival thought big under lockdown Roger Granville, Max Fane and Frankie Parham are not men to let a worldwide pandemic get in their way. Plans for the fourth New Generation festival in …
Poem of the week: Akwaba by Kwame Dawes Akwaba For Sena i Brown snow lines the roadways. The still, grey city whispers in the sunrise, inching into bloom. I see your slick wet head swaddled …
UK tour by Mark Kozelek cancelled following sexual assault allegations A forthcoming UK tour by Sun Kil Moon, fronted by US indie-rock musician Mark Kozelek who is also known for the group Red House Painters and a solo ca …
'We want a fairer society': Freddy Lim, Taiwan's metalhead MP It’s a crisp December night in the heart of Taipei, and Freddy Lim is presiding over a campaign rally to remember. Flanked by his bandmates, and looki …
CP Lee obituary For a time during the 1970s my friend CP Lee, who has died aged 70, teetered on the brink of celebrity with his Manchester-based satirical rock band A …
Not the Booker 2020: the first three novels on our shortlist are … The votes have been cast, checked and counted. The first three books to go through to the next round of competition are: Hello Friend We Missed You by …
Hole, Reading festival 1994: grieving widow expels the pain Hole’s Reading festival debut came shrouded in a certain level of morbid anticipation. Female-fronted acts on the festival’s main stage are a rare sig …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start with the mighty Beryl Bainbridge. book …
House music: Rian Evans' watching and listening highlights I’ve had Gerhardt’s Hyperion recording of the six Bach Cello suites on constant rotation during the last few months. Calming and stimulating – whateve …
Glennon Doyle: how the author and love warrior changed Adele's life Name: Glennon Doyle. Age: 44. Appearance: Adele’s happiness guru. Adele Adele? Yes, Adele the woman who made her millions by singing gut-wrenchingly a …
Death in Her Hands by Ottessa Moshfegh review – whodunnit and other questions Over the past six years, Ottessa Moshfegh has dedicated herself so assiduously to writing about people in self-isolation you have to wonder what she k …
‘I love gay techno!’ Sigur Rós singer Jónsi on his bold new direction Around 2010, Jónsi Birgisson, the angel-voiced frontman of Icelandic post-rock experimentalists Sigur Rós, had plans to start a new musical side proje …
As You Were by Elaine Feeney review – a poet's darkly comic fiction debut Summary: Elaine Feeney has published three acclaimed collections of poetry before turning to novels, and her fiction debut, As You Were, is steeped in the rhyt …
Mark Kozelek denies sexual abuse allegations Mark Kozelek, the American songwriter recently accused of sexually assaulting three women, has “unconditionally” denied the claims made against him. I …
Pandit Jasraj: tributes paid to 'incomparable genius' of Indian classical music Summary: The Indian classical vocalist Pandit Jasraj has died at the age of 90, a man described by one of his senior disciples, Sanjeev Abhyankar, as “an incom …
Mieko Kawakami: 'Women are no longer content to shut up' Mieko Kawakami began writing partly to explore the “randomness and strangeness” of life – so it is oddly fitting that the release of her novel Breasts …
'I prefer a more domestic murder': the thrilling nastiness of PD James Crime is a nasty business, and PD James makes sure we know it. A Taste for Death starts with one of the most foul descriptions of murder you are likel …
Writers, actors and directors call for end to homophobia in Poland in open letter Summary: Polish Nobel laureate Olga Tokarczuk, Margaret Atwood, JM Coetzee, Ian McEwan, Slavoj Žižek and Judith Butler are among more than 70 signatories to an …
Still House Plants: 'In experimental music there's a lot of whiteness, snobbery, pretension' A show by Still House Plants might start with drummer David Kennedy thoughtfully assembling his kit. Only once the kick is weighted down, the snares a …
Alex the Astronaut: 'I didn’t want to tell anyone that I was gay, let alone millions of strangers' One of the most affecting moments on Alex the Astronaut’s debut album tells a story that is not her own. I Like to Dance is a striking first-person ac …
'It's meant to be triggering': the artist unpacking Melbourne Town's Hall's 'skeletons in the closet' Naretha Williams stares ominously from the cover of her new LP Blak Mass, hands outstretched as if performing an incantation. Standing in front of a l …
The Lying Life of Adults by Elena Ferrante review – a girl's own story Elena Ferrante is so good on the bodily feelings of female adolescence: the sweaty, clotted skin, the sudden bulges as breasts form, the awkwardly exc …
'You'll have to die to get these texts': Ocean Vuong’s next manuscript to be unveiled in 2114 Ocean Vuong is to become the seventh author in the Future Library, an ongoing art project that sees contemporary writers pen works that will remain un …
Britney Spears files for father to be replaced as court-appointed guardian Britney Spears is seeking to make major changes to the court-appointed conservatorship that has controlled various aspects of her life since a public …
Chopin: where to start with his music Though he wrote no operas, oratorios or symphonies – nothing, in fact, that did not involve a piano – Frédéric Chopin (1810-1849) was one of the supre …
Stevie Wonder, Festac 1977: a unifying moment of transatlantic black pride Staged in Lagos, Nigeria, Festac 77 (The Second World Festival of Black and African Arts and Culture, to give it its full name) was the cultural clima …
A mushroom-related brush with mortality: how John Cage fell for fungi In February 1959, while on a visit to fellow composer Luciano Berio in Milan, John Cage appeared five times on a popular Italian television quiz show …
Mordew by Alex Pheby review – an extravagant, unnerving fantasy Culture comes in clumps, like queues of No 7 buses. In the 1590s everyone was writing sonnets; in the 1950s cinema was wall-to-wall westerns. Soon eno …
Munkey Diaries 1957-1982 by Jane Birkin review – passion and pop in Paris “Cliff Richard to me is perfect, and I do love him,” writes the 16-year-old Jane Birkin, stuck at boarding school on the Isle of Wight with only her d …
Jeremiah Emmanuel: 'I hope my book gives people the courage to dream' To this day, Jeremiah Emmanuel remembers the first time he caught the 345 bus from Brixton, when he was eight years old. “The last stop said South Ken …
D’Erlanger & Dunhill: Piano Quintets review – fine quartet revives middling chamber music By any standards, the Sydney-based Goldner Quartet is one of the finest string quartets around today. Much as one would like to hear them in the core …
Lars Ulrich's fantasy festival: AC/DC and Bob Marley on Easter Island Location To me the idea of going to a festival starts with the journey, so I like the idea of a special destination. In 2013 we played in Antarctica – …
Performers could sing or play softly to reduce Covid risk, study shows Sing softly and don’t shout to reduce the risk of Covid-19 spread, new research suggests, offering a ray of hope for musicians who have been restricte …
Cut Copy on the role of dance music when dancefloors are closed: 'It doesn't really make sense' After almost two decades soundtracking nightclubs and parties, Dan Whitford is getting tired. When the founding member of the indie dance outfit Cut C …
Female British artists underrepresented on UK radio, survey finds British female musicians are dramatically underrepresented on UK radio stations, a study has found. A survey of the top 100 songs by British acts to f …
How to Stay Sane in an Age of Division by Elif Shafak review – a poignant look back at another age Two of the most intriguing walk-on characters in Elif Shafak’s How to Stay Sane are the little Egyptian girl named “Facebook” by her parents in that b …
Real Life by Brandon Taylor review – violent legacy of the past Wallace, the queer black biochemistry postgraduate at the centre of US author Brandon Taylor’s Booker-longlisted debut, often seeks out solitude. On t …
Maaza Mengiste: 'Knausgård really doesn’t need me as a reader, I can move on' The book I am currently reading I read a few books at once, and am working on strengthening my reading in Italian: Scholastique Mukasonga’s Igifu, tra …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Remi Wolf, Cardi B, Blink-182 Summary: Remi Wolf Monte Carlo In an interview with i-D in April, LA pop eccentric Remi Wolf – real name! – claimed her favourite song was goofy 90s novelty hi …
'We lost the love': UK nightclubs using Covid crisis to reassess scene Summary: In front of an old mechanic’s workshop in Tottenham a collection of trestle tables, a makeshift bar and a pair of palm trees are being battered by an …
Trini Lopez obituary “From the barrio to Beverly Hills,” was how the American entertainer Trini Lopez liked to describe his life’s journey. Lopez, who has died aged 83 fro …
Charles Allen obituary Charles Allen, who has died of cancer aged 80, interviewed the last generation of British administrators of India in 1974 for the BBC radio series Pla …
Lucy Ellmann lands James Tait Black prize, 38 years after her father's win Lucy Ellmann has won the UK’s oldest literary prize, the James Tait Black award, for her novel Ducks, Newburyport – almost four decades after her fath …
From defending Ivan Milat to seeking justice on Palm Island: Andrew Boe's life in the courtroom There are images in barrister Andrew Boe’s new book that are indelible, sketched only in a few words. Like when Boe had represented a man acquitted of …
Disclosure: 'When you're 15, a club is a pretty terrifying place' And so a summer has passed without a single tent unwittingly erected next to an all-night soundsystem, a single wristband being slipped off and passed …
Why the Germans Do It Better by John Kampfner review – notes from a grown-up country Not so long ago my wife and brother-in-law, whose parents were born in the Weimar Republic, had their German nationality restored. They were presented …
A-level students, I promise you - there is more to life than this There have been many tough moments in my life, but nothing as hard as waiting for my A-level results. My schooling wasn’t great – my predicted grades …
'The risk is enormous': UK live music still in crisis after reopening For singer-songwriter Frank Turner, an audience singalong is one of the most affecting parts of his live show. For his return to the stage on the day …
Eyes of the Rigel by Roy Jacobsen review – Norway's postwar secrets Summary: In the third part of a remarkable series of books, Roy Jacobsen returns to the protagonist he introduced in The Unseen: Ingrid Barrøy, born and raised …
Love thy neighbour? Sarah Moss on the darker side of community in a crisis I published my first novel, Cold Earth, which is set during an epidemic, on the day the World Health Organization declared avian flu to be a pandemic. …
Classical home listening: Mozart, Brahms and to the movies… • Mozart, prominent in Vienna in the early 1780s as pianist, composer and teacher, was busy raising funds through subscription concerts, his own perfo …
The best recent crime and thrillers – review roundup A superb character study wrapped up in a high-octane heist novel, SA Cosby’s Blacktop Wasteland (Headline, £16.99) is the story of Beauregard “Bug” Mo …
Burna Boy: Twice As Tall review – new heights for the Afro-fusion wizard The tale of Nigerian superstar Burna Boy’s globe-straddling fifth album begins where many artists dream of ending up – at the 2020 US Grammy awards, h …
Robert Macfarlane: 'Are we being good ancestors? Mostly, no' Robert Macfarlane, 44, writer and Cambridge University professor, made his name as a revelatory close reader of landscapes and language. His eighth bo …
Andrew McCormack: Solo review – prepare to be seduced I’ve been listening to this album for several weeks, on and off, and it has grown more intriguing each time. For a set of solo piano pieces it’s remar …
The People, No review: elites, anti-populism and how progressive promise is squandered Summary: Thomas Frank has a simple thesis: populism has been mischaracterized by its enemies, since its birth at the end of the 19th century, as a “one-word ev …
Rave on: the rise of middle-aged clubbing culture during lockdown Facemasks and gloves are back – and so are ravers. Lockdown has precipitated a revival of 90s rave culture with middle-aged clubbers reliving their yo …
Nubya Garcia: Source review – a virtuoso's generous solo debut Sometimes, saxophonists seem like the rock stars of the jazz world. Alongside Shabaka Hutchings, Nubya Garcia is the soloist with whom the eclectic, d …
The New Wilderness by Diane Cook review – a planet brought to its knees by the human race Plenty has been written lately about the beneficial effects of exposure to nature and it’s a cultural belief that is referred to early on – and, cruci …
In brief: Blue Ticket; How Do We Know We're Doing It Right?; Underland – review Blue Ticket Sophie Mackintosh Hamish Hamilton, £12.99, pp304 Mackintosh’s dystopian second novel imagines a patriarchal world in which a woman’s right …
Stick in the Wheel: Hold Fast review – Anglo Saxon Auto-Tune, anyone? Summary: Much of the acclaim for London-based English folk evolutionists Nicola Kearey (vocals) and Ian Carter (guitar/producer) has been down to their willing …
Duckwrth: SuperGood review – a west coast summer breeze In the five years or so since his emergence, Los Angeles-based artist Duckwrth, AKA Jared Lee, has established himself as one to watch.His work spans …
BBC considers dropping Rule Britannia from Last Night of the Proms The traditional flag-waving anthems Rule Britannia and Land of Hope of Glory could be dropped from the Last Night of the Proms because of their percei …
Justin Townes Earle, US songwriter and son of Steve Earle, dies aged 38 Justin Townes Earle, an acclaimed US songwriter and son of Steve Earle, has died, in news confirmed on the artist’s Facebook page on Sunday night. “It …
Vesper Flights by Helen Macdonald review – towards the sixth extinction In H Is for Hawk, her 2014 memoir of a year spent taming a raptor as she tried to get a grip on her reckless grief at the loss of her beloved father, …
'It all crumbled': pop stars on mental health in the age of Covid While in lockdown pop star Arlo Parks started a new routine to help de-stress: working out with her mum and dad. Three times a week the family would e …
Sisters by Daisy Johnson review – complex and chilling If I could bring any writer back from the dead, I think I’d choose Shirley Jackson, only because she’d write so very well about what it was like to be …
Missy Elliott, Lilith Fair 1998: a sensational burst of black fantasy Created in 1997, Lilith Fair was intended as a testament to female creativity and empowerment – a Lollapalooza-style touring caravan that would consis …
Poem of the week: Felix Randal by Gerard Manley Hopkins Felix Randal Felix Randal the farrier, O is he dead then? my duty all ended, Who have watched his mould of man, big-boned and hardy-handsome Pining, p …
'Art finds a way': carnivals go off-road and online for coronavirus Back in February, the streets of Trinidad and Tobago’s Port of Spain were full of carnival revellers, as is the custom for what is billed as the great …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Summary: Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. First, a journey into the past with Malunkey, who …
Gillian White obituary Gillian White, who has died aged 75, wrote 16 novels, mostly psychological thrillers, four of which were adapted for TV. Her characters encountered da …
House music: Tim Ashley's watching and listening highlights Summary: I’ve spent the last couple of weeks catching up with the Edinburgh international festival, which has moved online and on to the radio this year. At 11 …
I Am Woman: how Helen Reddy’s music roared through the women’s movement When Unjoo Moon visits Helen Reddy, they always gravitate towards the record player Moon bought the singer. Reddy, who’s been diagnosed with dementia, …
John Weeks obituary Summary: John Weeks, who has died aged 79, was one of a group of prominent economists who, after the global financial crisis of 2008, began to push back agains …
Rule, Britannia! will be played at Proms but not sung, BBC confirms The Last Night of the Proms will feature the traditional flag-waving anthems Rule, Britannia! and Land of Hope and Glory, the BBC confirmed on Monday …
Van Morrison blasts Covid gig limits as 'pseudoscience' Van Morrison has denounced the supposed “pseudoscience” around coronavirus and is attempting to rally musicians in a campaign to restore live music co …
Hippy dream or total nightmare? The untold story of Isle of Wight 1970 Shortly before the infamous 1970 Isle of Wight festival, Stanley Dunmore, a local public health inspector, worried about “a possible breakdown of publ …
A clumsy, cringey crescendo: why A Taste for Death is hard to swallow When Robert McCrum asked PD James if she believed in original sin, she replied: “I don’t think we come into the world as unselfish, kind and loving. I …
'From the mundane to the sublime in a second': Samantha Cristoforetti on life in space There’s something surreal about talking to someone who’s been to space. Italian astronaut Samantha Cristoforetti might be at home in Cologne while I’m …
Proms row: Johnson calls for end to 'cringing embarrassment' over UK history Boris Johnson has said the UK should stop “our cringing embarrassment about our history” and sing Rule, Britannia! at the Last Night of the Proms, as …
Megan Washington's happiness problem: 'What the hell do you write songs about?' Before she made her new album, Megan Washington had to ask herself some big questions. The most important of which was: what happens to the music if y …
‘Trump-like culture war’: Boris Johnson wades into Proms row It started as a speculative story in a Sunday newspaper and ended up as another skirmish in a culture war – which filled front pages, prompted calls t …
More Than a Woman by Caitlin Moran review – superbly funny At the start of her new book, Caitlin Moran is visited by the ghost of her future who gleefully informs her that while she may think that the most dif …
Summerwater by Sarah Moss review – a dark holiday in Scotland Summary: Like a dim shape shifting in the depths of a loch, there is something very dark at work just out of sight in Sarah Moss’s seventh novel. Its title is …
Riley Gale, frontman with thrash metal band Power Trip, dies aged 34 Riley Gale, lead singer of Texas thrash metal band Power Trip, has died aged 34. No cause of death has been announced. The band wrote in a statement: …
JS Bach: where to start with his music ‘The immortal god of harmony”: that’s what Beethoven, no less, called Johann Sebastian Bach. “Music owes as much to Bach as religion to its founder,” …
Top 10 books about Florence ‘Florence is a very noir city,” a film-maker once told me 10 years ago, on learning that I wrote thrillers set there. (The sixth in my Florentine dete …
Amazon TV adaptation of Iain Banks' Culture series is cancelled The estate of Iain Banks has blamed timing for the demise of a planned Amazon television adaptation of the late author’s beloved Culture series. The a …
Tupac Shakur letters and Notorious BIG's crown up for auction at Sotheby's A series of love letters written by Tupac Shakur and a crown worn by Notorious BIG during a photoshoot a few days before his death are among the items …
Riley Gale: the death of thrash metal's great idealist is a terrible loss Fusing the technical prowess of thrash metal with the warp speed blast of hardcore – and a political stance that emphasised compassion and tolerance – …
The government called the exam algorithm 'robust'. How robust was that claim? The British government repeatedly said that the algorithm designed to make up exam grades for pupils who weren’t able to take them was “robust”, short …
Entangled Life by Merlin Sheldrake review – a brilliant 'door opener' book “When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe.” So said the nature writer John Muir. His statemen …
The Midnight Library by Matt Haig review – a celebration of life's possibilities Summary: Nora Seed feels useless. Her cat is dead, her brother doesn’t seem to be interested in her, and she has been fired: nobody needs her. Late one evening …
John Lennon killer Mark David Chapman denied parole for 11th time Summary: Mark David Chapman, who murdered John Lennon outside his New York apartment in 1980, has been denied parole for the 11th time. A parole board at Wende …
Bettye LaVette: 'James Brown would have fired Kanye West 12 times' Summary: Bettye LaVette is talking about James Brown and liberally fire-hosing one of her favourite words down the fuzzy line from New Jersey. “That muthafucka …
The greatest hardcore rave tracks – ranked! 25. Bug Khan and Plastic Jam – Made in Two Minutes (1991) If hardcore rave was rooted in house and techno, the prosaically titled Made in Two Minutes …
Ives: Complete Symphonies review – Dudamel captures the rapture of an iconoclast Before normal concert life ground to a halt in March, one of Gustavo Dudamel’s last projects with the Los Angeles Philharmonic was a cycle of Charles …
Melanie C's fantasy festival: Beyoncé, Prince and five kinds of chips Location I’m not going too tropical or exotic. I was lucky enough to play a mountain festival near Keswick in the Lake District a couple of years ago, …
Barry St John obituary My friend Barry St John, who has died aged 76, was one of the elite group of backing singers who were the first choice for major 1970s artists keen to …
Washington: Batflowers review – a brooding swirl of survival and surrender No, really, this is her happy face. That Batflowers arrives, and in the main leaves, with its exuberance trimmed and its perspective lowered to somewh …
UK rapper Nines: 'I want to take the hood with me and help everyone out' Summary: ‘We’re probably the only estate left in London with a concrete pitch,” says Courtney Freckleton, better known as the rapper Nines. He is talking about …
Babe, Terror: Horizogon review – hear the dread and hope of lockdown ‘I thought of this as a soundtrack from an apocalyptic São Paulo,” says Claudio Szynkier, AKA electronic producer Babe, Terror, of his latest album Ho …
Toni Braxton: Spell My Name review – master of breakups and baby-making Toni Braxton’s career has been hampered at times by multiple bankruptcies, coping with lupus, and reality TV show drama on Braxton Family Values. Ther …
Black Spartacus by Sudhir Hazareesingh review – the epic life of Toussaint Louverture Summary: No figure from the 18th-century “age of revolution” had as extraordinary a life as Toussaint Louverture. He was born a slave in the 1740s, in one of t …
Richard Osman: 'I want to be writing novels for the rest of my life now' The book I am currently reading The Nickel Boys by Colson Whitehead. I was about to read The Underground Railroad when I noticed that The Nickel Boys …
Emma Cline: 'We are forced to imagine what’s going on in the minds of men' Summary: In the many photos of Emma Cline that appeared in the media in 2016, when her hugely successful first book, The Girls, was published, she tended to lo …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Miley Cyrus, Lupin, Peaches Miley Cyrus Midnight Sky “See my lips on her mouth, everybody’s talking now,” muses 2013’s most wanted on this disco-tinged, post-divorce banger. The …
Deirdre Le Faye obituary No one who is seriously interested in Jane Austen can learn much about her without turning to the work of Deirdre Le Faye, who has died aged 86. Descr …
JK Rowling returns human rights award to group that denounces her trans views Summary: JK Rowling is returning the Ripple of Hope award given to her last year by the Robert F Kennedy Human Rights (RFKHR) organisation after its president, …
Alan Jacobs obituary My friend Alan Jacobs, who has died aged 90, was an authority on the works of mystical thinkers. His speciality was the compilation and editing of ant …
Do you remember the first time? The joys of YouTube reaction videos Summary: Earlier this month a wonderful thing – remember those? – happened. Twin brothers Tim and Fred Williams, who post YouTube vids under the name Twinsisth …
Librarian who put books behind Boris Johnson says message was for school The school librarian who stacked the shelves behind Boris Johnson’s podium with titles including The Twits, Betrayed and The Subtle Knife has admitted …
Who They Was by Gabriel Krauze review – the double life of a London gangster Contemporary English fiction is, with a few exceptions, a bourgeois affair: middle-class authors writing for middle-class readers about high-class pro …
Children's books roundup – the best new picture books and novels Sly humour abounds in picture books this month. Morag Hood deploys her characteristic surreal comedy via bold primary-coloured images in Spaghetti Hun …
Classical home listening: Jamie Barton sings Jake Heggie • Of the many connections between Joyce DiDonato, Susan Graham and Jamie Barton – all mega-star American mezzo-sopranos – one fact in particular unite …
Bill Callahan: Gold Record review – time to join the pantheon of great American singer-songwriters Bill Callahan, the cult US singer-songwriter, isn’t fond of weddings. Even when it’s his wife’s friends who are getting hitched, he feels a disconnect …
One to watch: Big Joanie When Big Joanie formed in 2013, there wasn’t a ready-made scene for black feminist punk bands. As singer/guitarist Stephanie Phillips told the Quietus …
Afel Bocoum: Lindé review – captivating desert blues with a twist Child prodigies don’t always rocket to fame. Songwriter and guitarist Afel Bocoum was inducted into the group of Mali’s late great bluesman Ali Farka …
Denise Mina: 'I couldn't read until I was about nine' Denise Mina was born in East Kilbride in 1966 and now lives in Glasgow. Her novels include The Long Drop, which won the Gordon Burn prize, and The End …
Rule, Britannia! row is ‘a laughable irrelevance’, says former Proms chief Politicians “meddling in concert programming” over the Last Night of the Proms are a “laughable irrelevance”, according to a former director of the BB …
JFK: Volume One review – a superhero made human During John Fitzgerald Kennedy’s presidential campaign in 1960, Norman Mailer imagined him on the exalted heights, in the company of Nietzsche’s super …
‘He's staring into my soul’: how Phil Collins made teenagers YouTube stars Rock’n’roll stars have for years paid tribute to black musicians who crafted the form; now Tim Williams and his twin brother, Fred – fans of hip-hop a …
The Wild Silence by Raynor Winn review – in search of healing and home In her bestselling debut, The Salt Path, Raynor Winn walked several hundred miles round England’s South West Coast Path with her husband, Moth, sleepi …
How the mysteries of the eel’s sex life  have inspired a bestseller “There’s a heron in the book, too,” Patrik Svensson calls over after we notice the bird perched in the willow tree under whose arches the writer is be …
Andrew O'Hagan: 'If you are honest, you never stop being who you were' Every teenager, or every teenager who is lucky, has a Keith. Keith is the friend who jokes and dresses with more swagger than anyone else, who looks o …
Brixton Hill by Lottie Moggach review – close encounters with a con Lottie Moggach’s talent is her own, yet it is impossible not to speculate – if you have read Deborah Moggach’s fiction – about the possibility of a na …
Katy Perry: Smile review – tireless trouper loses momentum Pop’s Queen Weeble, Katy Perry has made wobbling but never falling down her MO, belting out her chin-up, grin-on anthems tirelessly. Yet even she can’ …
Play what you see: how graphic scores can unleash your inner musical genius Matt Ashdown is determined to make all aspects of music-making open to everyone – composing, recording and performing. Haven’t got an instrument? His …
Kelly Lee Owens: Inner Song review – a DJ finds her voice Summary: Delayed to show “solidarity” with record shops threatened by Covid, Kelly Lee Owens’s second album finds the banging techno DJ venturing further into …
In brief: House of Music; The Midnight Library; Signs of Civilisation – review House of Music: Raising the Kanneh-Masons Kadiatu Kanneh-Mason Oneworld, £18.99, pp320 When 17-year-old cellist Sheku Kanneh-Mason won BBC Young Music …
Letter: Peter Green obituary Among the many gigs I have attended, perhaps the most surreal was the one that took place in June 1970 in the music room of my school, Woodhouse gramm …
LPO/Pappano review – wonderful warmth and magical moments With a no-nonsense practicality that so far seems to have eluded concert organisers in London, Britten Pears Arts has launched a series of concerts wi …
MTV VMAs 2020: Lady Gaga dominates during unusual pandemic broadcast Lady Gaga dominated an unusual year for the MTV Video Music awards, winning five awards in a strange and disconcerting evening. The singer, who led th …
Paloma Faith: ‘I did a whole tour with postnatal depression. I was devastated’ Summary: There were choirs planned for Paloma Faith’s new album, a swell of voices to fill out the optimistic, celebratory songs. Then the pandemic struck. The …
The best books about medical breakthroughs As medical researchers rush to find a vaccine for Covid-19, the stories of earlier medical breakthroughs offer hope, but also reasons to be cautious a …
Thomas Piketty refuses to censor latest book for sale in China The latest book by the French economist Thomas Piketty appears unlikely to be sold in mainland China after he refused requests to censor it. The Chine …
Alice Roberts: 'Atheism is defining yourself by an absence. Humanism is a positive choice' Prof Alice Roberts, the broadcaster, scientist and author, has been filming this week for the third series of Channel 4’s Britain’s Most Historic Town …
Poem of the week: Thick orchards, all in white by Jean Ingelow Summary: Thick orchards, all in white The time of the singing of birds is come. Thick orchards, all in white, Stand ‘neath blue voids of light, And birds among …
Proms 2020: LSO/Rattle review – empty Albert Hall allows room to play Playing to an empty Albert Hall can have its advantages, and Simon Rattle and the London Symphony Orchestra’s contribution to the audience-free Proms …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. First, storm46 expresses “grateful thanks” to ever …
Not the Booker: Hashim & Family by Shahnaz Ahsan review – an important tale of migration Immigration takes guts. It’s hard to leave your home and everything you know, never mind the physical and bureaucratic obstacles, or having to learn a …
Roger Quigley obituary Summary: My friend, Roger Quigley, who has died unexpectedly aged 51, was a much-loved musician and songwriter, best known for his solo work as Quigley and At …
Reading and Leeds festival announces 2021 lineup Reading and Leeds festival has rolled over two of its 2020 headline acts to 2021, and announced a number of other major artists. Rage Against the Mach …
BTS: K-pop stars become first all-South Korean act to top US singles charts The K-pop sensation BTS have become the first all-South Korean act to rule the top US singles chart, the industry tracker Billboard announced Monday, …
I used to shrug off the beauty of  New Zealand. Then I drove from the top to the bottom 14 September 2015: I’ve been in London for five years, and although I’m often full of spirits, my creative spirit is dampened by heartbreak, unemploym …
Daddy by Emma Cline review – among the hollow men Emma Cline’s debut, The Girls, came wrapped in notoriety. It was a novel about a Manson-like cult, seen through the eyes of a teenager: a heady evocat …
Scammers target UK music festivals forced online by coronavirus Festivals across the UK have been hit by internet scammers this season, who are taking advantage of the fact most have been forced to go online-only b …
Toots Hibbert of reggae group Toots and the Maytals in intensive care Summary: Toots Hibbert, frontman of reggae group Toots and the Maytals, has been admitted to an intensive care unit in a Jamaican hospital with a possible case …
The Gilded Auction Block; Sometimes I Never Suffered by Shane McCrae - review Shane McCrae is a mixed-race American poet, who, at the age of three, was taken to Texas by his grandparents – who were white supremacists – away from …
Yusef Salaam: 'Trump would have had me hanging from a tree in Central Park' If Donald Trump had got his way I wouldn’t be speaking to Yusef Salaam right now. “Had his ad taken full effect we would have been hanging from trees …
Viv Albertine's memoirs to be adapted for TV Summary: Viv Albertine, the guitarist with the Slits who was at the core of the British punk movement, is to have her life story adapted for a television serie …
Charles & Eddie's Eddie Chacon: 'It took me 10 years to recover from being a one-hit wonder' Summary: Eddie Chacon still remembers hitting rock bottom. “It was 15 years ago,” he says. “And it sounds like something from like a bad movie.” Since childhoo …
Dictionary.com revises definitions to eliminate prejudiced language Dictionary.com is making major changes to more than 15,000 of its definitions, from capitalising Black to updating entries about sexual orientation, a …
Loss of free tuition 'will make UK jazz whiter, posher and more male' Summary: The world-renowned British jazz scene will become whiter, posher and dominated by men unless there is more funding to keep access to tuition free, acc …
Reading group: The Age of Innocence by Edith Wharton is our book for September For this month’s reading group, we’re going to look at Edith Wharton’s 1920 masterpiece, The Age of Innocence. It’s 100 years since the publication of …
'We sound like superheroes!' – the rappers inspired by the Paralympics ‘Biggie made being a big guy cool,” says George Doman. “I want to make being disabled cool. I don’t see why we can’t. Honestly? On this new song, we s …
Men Who Hate Women by Laura Bates review – fierce and eye-opening Summary: Some men have for years been trying to deny women the right to their own safe spaces. In the 1970s, the anti-feminist “men’s rights” movement was born …
Strange Flowers by Donal Ryan review – a compassionate tale of homecoming When a young woman vanishes from her parents’ home in rural Tipperary it can mean only one of two things: “Moll Gladney was either pregnant or dead, a …
Stories have always been healing, so I’m funding bibliotherapists Summary: This year, my detective Vera Stanhope turns 21. She first appeared in 1999 in a book called The Crow Trap, which was conceived while I walked miles ro …
Top 10 books about space travel One of the funny little things I noticed after having lived in space for a while is that, contrary to everyday experience on Earth, it took some effor …
Dave, Little Simz and Jamie Cullum win at 2020 Ivor Novello awards Dave, Little Simz and Jamie Cullum are major winners at 2020’s Ivor Novello awards, which honour the best in British songwriting and screen compositio …
'Aggression, but also fragility': how Norwegian black metal grew up Summary: On 8 April, 1991, Per Ohlin – the singer with Norwegian metal outfit Mayhem – killed himself in his band’s shared house in Kråkstad. His body was disc …
The return of Arab Strap: 'Sex and death are our eternal preoccupations' Summary: ‘I don’t give a fuck about the past or glory days gone by,” sings Aidan Moffat on the opening line to The Turning of Our Bones, Arab Strap’s first new …
'Mutant algorithm': boring B-movie or another excuse from Boris Johnson? In the wake of the school exam results fiasco, the prime minister told a roomful of schoolchildren: “I am afraid your grades were almost derailed by a …
Royal Festival Hall in London reopens with BLM-inspired season Orchestras are to return to one of Britain’s most distinctive concert halls after a six-month absence with a season heavily influenced by this year’s …
Declan McKenna: Zeros review – pop prodigy is a very 21st-century boy The cover of Declan McKenna’s second album features a blurred photo of its 21-year-old author against a black background. He’s reaching out to the lis …
Run to the gills: how Iron Maiden's Adrian Smith got hooked on fishing Summary: It is not hard to spot Iron Maiden guitarist Adrian Smith making his way down Windsor’s Thames Street: he is head to toe in fishing clobber. The 63-ye …
Peter Grimes review – insightful recording is among the opera’s finest Summary: What kind of man is Peter Grimes? Beyond the guilty-or-innocent question that lies, never quite answered, at the root of Benjamin Britten’s opera, the …
Biggest books of autumn 2020: what to read in a very busy year Nonfiction This autumn will be like no other in the world of books. It’s always a busy season, but Covid-19 postponements mean that in September alone …
David Graeber, anthropologist and author of Bullshit Jobs, dies aged 59 David Graeber, anthropologist and anarchist author of bestselling books on bureaucracy and economics including Bullshit Jobs: A Theory and Debt: The F …
Suzanne Vega's teenage obsessions: 'Taxi Driver captured something awful but made it beautiful' Songs of Leonard Cohen After 1967, when this came out, if a stranger asked: “What’s your name, little girl?” and I said: “Suzanne,” they’d go: “Oh, li …
Erick Morillo obituary Half an hour into the 2005 animated film Madagascar, the viewer is confronted with a frozen tableau of jungle animals, poised and ready for a choreogr …
Dick Leahy obituary Behind every great artist there is often a wise mentor, and Dick Leahy, who has died aged 83, played that role for many of the acts he worked with. Da …
Revenge by SL Lim review – disarming tale of a life lived with clipped wings The first line of a novel is like the first notes of a song. It sets the mood, establishes the tempo, inaugurates the particular quality of what’s to …
Why Marc Bolan was 'the perfect pop star', by Elton John, U2 and more Summary: In early 1971, a nine-year-old called David Evans was sitting at home in the suburbs of Dublin watching Top of the Pops. He was already a Beatles fan, …
Hannah Georgas: All That Emotion review – magisterial indie-pop for introverts Summary: Taylor Swift isn’t the only singer-songwriter with an Aaron Dessner-produced album out this lockdown: the National man also recently lent his talents …
Sarah Davachi: Cantus, Descant review – resonant drones on donated organs Summary: The pipe organs that lie – often unplayed and ignored – across tens of thousands of churches were, for centuries, the most complex devices on earth. T …
The Lives of Lucian Freud by William Feaver review – Fame, 1968-2011 In 1995 the art critic David Sylvester caused a stir by suggesting in the Guardian that Lucian Freud – by then 73 and widely acknowledged as a major f …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Jaime Wyatt, Clean Bandit, BTS Jaime Wyatt Rattlesnake Girl When it comes to coming-out songs, Jaime Wyatt’s approach is singular. Pulling on her finest rodeo suit and stubbing out …
Ethan P Flynn: ‘Convincing myself that what I’m doing is good is a battle’ Summary: Ethan P Flynn knew the time was right to drop out of a prestigious place at London’s Guildhall School of Music when he worked with David Byrne on the …
'Trump has a different leadership style': David Rubenstein plays it by the book David Rubenstein’s first book of interviews featured leading historians and was called The American Story. Its sequel, focusing on business, politics, …
America Through Foreign Eyes review: a Mexican take on the US under Trump In 1830, Lorenzo de Zavala, the principal author of the 1824 Mexican constitution, found himself in exile. So decided to visit a nation he had long ad …
JFK: Volume One by Fredrik Logevall review – the Kennedys and the Trumps John F Kennedy and Donald J Trump have a surprising amount in common. Both are the second sons of wealthy, self-made fathers from up-by-their-bootstra …
I won't let Covid-19 infect my television adaptation of Queenie I watch a lot of television. I say it’s for research, but that’s an excuse. And in every programme that I’ve watched in the last few months, part of m …
The best recent science fiction and fantasy – review roundup Carole Stivers’s first novel was originally slated for British publication in May, but postponed because of the lockdown. The Mother Code (Hodder & St …
Claudia Rankine: 'By white privilege I mean the ability to stay alive' Claudia Rankine is a poet, playwright, essayist and adjunct professor of English and African American Studies at Yale University. She was born in Jama …
Kelsey Lu: ‘The white, cis, male hetero-patriarchy, it’s all being deconstructed’ In times of crisis, we need to make some space for healing: a long bath, a cry, a nourishing meal. It’s important to put time aside for restoration, a …
‘The man who shot my mum is still living his life’: Cherry Groce's son on life after police brutality Lee Lawrence was seven when he decided he wanted to be a police officer. He adored cop shows: Starsky & Hutch, The Professionals, CHiPs – you name it, …
The week in classical: LPO/Pappano; BBC Proms review – upbeat pleasures Even for the perennially hopeful, the initial prospect of ghostly recitals given to the sound of one hand clapping dampened spirits. Last week somethi …
Sophie Mackintosh: 'Suddenly I really wanted a baby - I resented that it felt outside my control' Summary: “Something has changed, but we don’t know what,” says Sophie Mackintosh. She’s explaining the scenario of her second novel, Blue Ticket, but she could …
Megan Thee Stallion review – a landmark performance One month on from suffering gunshot wounds to her feet, rapper du jour Megan Thee Stallion strides on to a stage in heels. Lit by searchlights, strafe …
Allison Neale: Quietly There review – cool intimacy personified It’s an alto saxophone sound rarely heard nowadays, cool but intimate, each phrase ending with a tiny shiver of vibrato, and no one deploys it with mo …
Wagnerism: Art and Politics in the Shadow of Music by Alex Ross – review Wagner gave his name to a movement that is also a contagious malaise and in surveying a Wagnerised world Alex Ross looks far beyond the composer’s mus …
Hannah Georgas: All That Emotion review – punches wrapped in velvet gloves Summary: Fans of the National might have spotted the burgeoning Canadian singer-songwriter Hannah Georgas opening for the band on their 2019 tour, taking on ba …
Stealing from the Saracens by Diana Darke review – a long-overlooked cultural exchange In 2019, a survey asked 3,624 Americans if Arabic numerals should be taught in school. An affronted 56% – and 72% of Republican respondents – said no. …
Skin: ‘I refused to play the game’ Night after night in her early teens, Deborah Anne Dyer – known to all as Skin – woke up to memories of the same recurring dream. She was standing on …
Who They Was by Gabriel Krauze review – ultraviolent swagger Summary: When the Guardian profiled the Polish political cartoonist Andrzej Krauze in 2001, mention was made in passing of his twin sons, then aged 15, “one a …
Golda Schultz: ‘Odd is the word for this Last Night of the Proms’ Born in Cape Town, educated at the Juilliard School, New York, and now based in Munich, the soprano Golda Schultz, 37, stars in the Last Night of the …
Throwing Muses: Sun Racket review – intense as ever Seven years on from Purgatory/Paradise – a 67-minute avalanche of sometimes half-formed songs and ideas – the first striking thing about Throwing Muse …
The Shift by Sam Baker review – funny, frank and empowering With its intimate tone, honesty and humour, The Shift sits comfortably within the “menopause memoir” genre. Baker divulges her midlife biological emba …
Michael Sandel: 'The populist backlash has been a revolt against the tyranny of merit' Michael Sandel was 18 years old when he received his first significant lesson in the art of politics. The future philosopher was president of the stud …
Hedwig eats Trump: John Cameron Mitchell on his 'musical orgy' about Donald's America Summary: On the morning of 4 November, following his defeat in the 2020 presidential election, Donald Trump will refuse to leave the White House. Instead, an a …
Tricky: Fall to Pieces review – eclectic, pithy pop songs If you were coming to Tricky’s 14th album without knowing anything about him (British trip-hop pioneer), you might wonder if it were the debut of an i …
CBSO 100th Birthday Celebration review – Simon Rattle makes sparks fly as orchestra reunites The City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra marked its centenary with a big concert, albeit with no audience present, streamed from the PRG Studio in Lo …
Tim Minchin, Troye Sivan, Midnight Oil: Australia's best new music for September Midnight Oil – Gadigal Land For fans of: Cold Chisel, Dragon, 80s pub rock in general This is the first new Midnight Oil song in 18 years, and we’ve n …
The Lives of Lucian Freud: Fame 1968-2011 by William Feaver – review Summary: When the second volume of William Feaver’s fat and extremely juicy biography of Lucian Freud begins, the artist is middle-aged: not far off 50, and st …
More Than a Woman by Caitlin Moran review – witty and wise Summary: It’s hard to overstate just how influential Caitlin Moran’s How to Be a Woman was when published in 2011 – and how far we’ve come since. Nine years on …
Poem of the week: How Poems Arrive by Anne Stevenson How Poems Arrive For Dana Gioia You say them as your undertongue declares, Then let them knock about your upper mind Until the shape of what they mean …
Why the Germans Do it Better by John Kampfner review – in praise of the powerhouse Books about the contemporary state of a country are hard to pull off. They need to capture the sweep of recent history and sundry quirks of culture, w …
'Beethoven was black': why the radical idea still has power today Exactly 80 years after Beethoven’s death, in 1907, the British composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor began speculating that Beethoven was black. Colderidge …
Not the Booker: Underdogs: Tooth and Nail by Chris Bonnello review – admirably unusual Britain has been taken over by an incompetent and narcissistic ruler who doesn’t care whether people live or die. Most of the population is locked up. …
TS Eliot estate steps in to help Brontë Parsonage Museum rescue appeal The estate of TS Eliot has stepped in to shore up the Brontë Parsonage with a £20,000 donation, after the historic building where the Brontë children …
'We will bring change': the Indian band shaking a cruel caste system When Isaivani starts singing the “beef song” with happy abandon it is nearly 10pm. The audience in the southern Indian city of Madurai seem to have lo …
La Bohème review  – Scottish Opera's Covid-safe Puccini is a triumph Summary: In these Covid-tainted times when concert halls and opera houses are closed to audiences and companies struggle to survive, Scottish Opera’s new produ …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup House of Correction Nicci French Simon & Schuster, £14.99, pp528 Tabitha Hardy is in prison for murder, as House of Correction opens. But she’s convin …
Live music and audiences return to Barbican Centre in recast autumn season London’s Barbican Centre announced on Tuesday the return of live concerts in a reimagined autumn 2020 season. A concert series, Live from the Barbican …
French book I Hate Men sees sales boom after government adviser calls for ban Summary: A French government official’s attempts to ban an essay entitled I Hate Men over its “incitement to hatred on the grounds of gender” have backfired, s …
Faridah Àbíké-Íyímídé: the 21-year-old British student with a million-dollar book deal Summary: A 21-year-old British university student has landed a million-dollar book deal in the US for her first novel, a high-school thriller that tackles inst …
DJing formally offered at GCSE: a challenge to a 'colonialised curriculum' When Austen Smart and his brother Scott were kids, they were driven amateur musicians, relentlessly making mixtapes and teaching themselves how to MC. …
Head Hand Heart by David Goodhart review – does getting a degree matter too much? David Goodhart has been on the winning side of successive ideological battles over the last 25 years. As founder of Prospect magazine in 1995, he corr …
Silver Apples synth pioneer Simeon Coxe dies aged 82 Summary: Simeon Coxe, co-founder of the pioneering 1960s experimental electronic band Silver Apples, has died aged 82. He had a progressive lung condition, pul …
Top 10 goddesses in fiction What springs to mind when you think of the word “goddess”? Divine feminine energy? Mother Earth? Ancient Greek women wafting around in white dresses c …
The Harpy by Megan Hunter review – a dark tale of domestic destruction Following her 2017 debut The End We Start From, a novel set in a post-apocalyptic flooded landscape, Megan Hunter’s The Harpy imagines a more familiar …
Silver Apples' Simeon Coxe: visionary who saw music's electronic future Summary: In the late 1960s, before Tangerine Dream’s Phaedra became the post-hippy stoner’s soundtrack of choice, before Kraftwerk’s Autobahn instilled the ide …
Throwing Muses' Kristin Hersh: 'I knew integrity would pull me into the gutter' In 2013, after Kristin Hersh’s 25-year marriage came to an end, she was left broke and without health insurance. The songs she wrote in the aftermath …
Stormzy dedicates video for song Superheroes to Chadwick Boseman Stormzy has dedicated the newly released video for his song Superheroes to Chadwick Boseman following the actor’s death last month aged 43. The video …
J Hus, Stefflon Don and Dizzee Rascal: Rated awards celebrate black British music Summary: J Hus has won album of the year at the fifth annual Rated awards, which celebrate the best of Black British music. The musician’s second album, Big Co …
Guardian Australia's Book Club: why does medicine care so little about women's bodies? When I first started thinking that I needed to write a book about women’s health, my questions were too big and the canon too small to define what it …
When We Cease to Understand the World by Benjamín Labatut review – the dark side of science God does not play dice with the world, Albert Einstein famously declared, to which Benjamín Labatut would surely retort: perhaps not – but the devil d …
Burning the Books by Richard Ovenden review – knowledge under attack It’s both amusing and a little bit touching that a lifelong librarian has written a book in which librarians are the heroes. None wears a cape; they d …
Doves: The Universal Want review – soaring soundtrack to changing lives Last year, Doves played a series of comeback gigs after nearly a decade on hiatus. The trio seemed startled by the response. “It’s sold out!” frontman …
All-female rap collaborations – ranked! 20. Lizzo feat Sophia Eris – Batches and Cookies (2013) The single from Lizzo’s pre-fame debut album, Lizzobangers, Batches and Cookies is irresistibl …
LSO/Rattle review – Turnage, Knussen and Britten make an evening to be savoured Ever since he took over as music director of the London Symphony Orchestra, Simon Rattle has made a point of beginning each new season at the Barbican …
Kool & the Gang's Ronald 'Khalis' Bell: a musical chameleon and disco giant Ronald “Khalis” Bell was nothing if not an adaptable musician and songwriter. He began his career aged 13, playing jazz in New York’s famous Café Wha? …
'She began the real sexual revolution for women': Shere Hite dies aged 77 The pioneering feminist Shere Hite, known for her research on female sexuality, has died at the age of 77. She was best known for The Hite Report: A N …
The Morbids by Ewa Ramsey review – mental illness captured with remarkable nuance and skill The Morbids takes its title from the unofficial moniker of a therapy group that its protagonist, Caitlin, attends in a “nondescript community room in …
Stormzy’s game face: grime artist goes digital for latest hit Stormzy has filmed the music video for Rainfall, the forthcoming single from his No 1 album Heavy is the Head, entirely inside a video game. The award …
Just Ignore Him by Alan Davies review – a life derailed by abuse Alan Davies’s first memoir, My Favourite People and Me 1978-1988 (later republished as Teenage Revolution), was a wry look at his suburban adolescence …
Sid Meier's Memoir review – Civilization creator is all about fun One billion hours, veteran game designer Sid Meier notes in this light and enjoyable memoir, is an unfathomable length of time. And yet it took just s …
Bróna McVittie: The Man in the Mountain review – eerie ambience and visionary space Softer, more pastoral takes on folk music are hard to get right. Compromises have to be made, otherwise they curdle into tweeness, or float away like …
Susanna: Baudelaire & Piano review – a cool breath of Nordic autumn Susanna Wallumrød’s extraordinary career sees no sign of becoming quotidian. Though a composer – adept in many styles of contemporary music – she’s al …
Nick Hornby: ‘I can quote more Molesworth than I can Shakespeare' The book I am currently reading Sebastian Smee’s brilliant The Art of Rivalry: Four Friendships, Betrayals and Breakthroughs in Modern Art. I can neve …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Deep Sea Diver, Monica, John Frusciante Deep Sea Diver ft Sharon Van Etten Impossible Weight Adding Sharon Van Etten to a song is hardly going to make it worse, but sticking her on one this …
Aurora Orch/Collon review – Ayres and Beethoven pairing is vivid and lithe Summary: No 52: Three Pieces About Ludwig van Beethoven, Richard Ayres’ BBC co-commission, received its premiere at the audience-free Proms from Nicholas Collo …
Produce Pandas: China's all-singing, all-dancing, plus-sized boyband While the new Chinese boyband Produce Pandas’ ethos represents pretty standard pop idol fare – promoting positivity, acting as good role models – ther …
'We haven't seen anything like it since Harry Potter': UK bookshops report record week Booksellers up and down the UK are reporting a boom in sales since readers returned to bookshops after the lockdown, with the first avalanche of Chris …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 11-18 September Fidelio Garsington Opera brings Peter Mumford’s concert staging of Beethoven’s opera to its purpose-built theatre in the Chilterns. Katherine Broderic …
Ronald Bell obituary Kool & the Gang were one of the first fully fledged funk ensembles – taking the influence of Sly Stone and James Brown’s pioneering recordings and ble …
It may be hard to find conservative satirists - but how about satyrs? Summary: The BBC’s new director general recently said that there was a leftwing bias in its output of topical satire, and that comedy shows should henceforth b …
Mayflies by Andrew O’Hagan review – a bittersweet tale of friendship Summary: There’s a nod to Alan Sillitoe’s classic about postwar working-class life, Saturday Night and Sunday Morning (1958) – and the 1960 film starring Alber …
Tenet is fine – just being in the cinema is more exciting One of the things I’ve missed most of all is the cinema. There’s something so perfect about sitting in the dark for two hours (though ideally 90 minut …
Toots Hibbert, pioneering reggae star, dies aged 77 Toots Hibbert, whose glorious songcraft as frontman of Toots and the Maytals helped make reggae globally famous, has died aged 77. A statement from hi …
Attica Locke: why did my black ancestors never leave Texas? They knew land is power I come from a long line of black Texans, going back generations, all the way to slavery. The Great Migration was the largest migration of people withi …
Martin Amis: 'I was horrified that Trump got in. Now it’s looking scary' The new novel by Martin Amis, Inside Story, which combines elements of memoir with fiction and in which Amis himself is the protagonist, features a ps …
Toots Hibbert obituary In the years before Bob Marley shot to worldwide fame, Toots Hibbert, who has died aged 77, was one of the main global faces of reggae music – or at l …
Shakespearean sisterhood: Maggie O'Farrell on Hamnet In the run-up to publication of her novel Hamnet at the end of March, Maggie O’Farrell bought herself a vintage dress. “There was going to be a party …
Susanna Clarke: ‘I was cut off from the world, bound in one place by illness’ Sixteen years ago, Susanna Clarke’s debut novel became a publishing phenomenon. Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell is an unlikely story of intellectual obs …
Toots Hibbert's pure, powerful voice carried reggae to the world Bob Marley and the Wailers were the band who transformed reggae from a cult phenomenon outside of its homeland. But it was the Wailers’ rivals, Toots …
Eight Detectives by Alex Pavesi review – a homage to the whodunnit No other genre of literature has been subject to as many strict rules as detective fiction in its “golden age” of the 1920s and 30s. Crime author Rona …
Classical home listening: Joshua Bell and a Mahler must-have • In a 30-year career bristling with awards and success as a soloist on the world’s most illustrious stages, the American violinist Joshua Bell has al …
The best books to inspire compassion When we talk of compassion, suffering is never very far away, as the origin of the word attests: the Latin compassio means “suffering with”. During th …
Richard and Linda Thompson: Hard Luck Stories 1972–1982 review – a tempestuous tale worth retelling Summary: Box sets often exist merely to evacuate the wallets of the faithful. Here, though, over eight CDs (or a big download) is the story of one of the most …
One to watch: Moonchild Sanelly If you felt the giddy thrill of Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion’s explicit hit WAP this summer then Moonchild Sanelly is bringing more of the same. Wi …
Turnage world premiere review – a heartfelt tribute to Oliver Knussen The composer-conductor Oliver Knussen died, aged 66, more than two years ago. That loss still feels raw to countless musicians. From his teenage years …
Toots Hibbert's last interview: 'Don’t take life for granted, be careful, be strong' Toots Hibbert brought out his most recent album, Got to Be Tough, in August. What now stands as his final album is a positive listen, with lyrics abou …
Toots and the Maytals: Got to Be Tough review – a muscular, uptempo final album Frederick “Toots” Hibbert spent much of his lengthy career singing about resilience during hard times – Pressure Drop, Time Tough, 54-46 That’s My Num …
Ann Goldstein: 'I try to make it really clear that I am not Elena Ferrante' Ann Goldstein is a New York-based translator, renowned for her work on the acclaimed novels of the enigmatic and pseudonymous Elena Ferrante. Goldstei …
How the South Won the Civil War review: the path from Jim Crow to Donald Trump Heather Cox Richardson’s How the South Won the Civil War is not principally about that war. Instead, it is a broad sweep of American history on the th …
Toto, ELO, Queen ... why hits from happier times top Covid lockdown playlists It seems that a lot of us “miss the rains down in Africa”. Of all the strange sociological consequences of Covid-19, few would have predicted that one …
Left Out: The Inside Story of Labour Under Corbyn; This Land: The Story of a Movement - review A week before the general election of 2019, Jeremy Corbyn’s private secretary furnished his aides and closest allies with an itinerary. Among its cont …
Anjimile: Giver Taker review – a compelling debut Summary: Imitation might be the sincerest form of flattery, but ordinarily, artists who draw too hard from one source let down their own muse, and short-change …
Ernó Rubik: 'The Cube gives me hope people can solve their problems and survive' Ernó Rubik, 76, is the Hungarian creator of the Rubik’s Cube. The idea came to him almost out of nowhere: he simply asked himself if it might be inter …
Homeland Elegies by Ayad Akhtar review – courageous and timely Summary: In Ayad Akhtar’s 2013 Pulitzer prize-winning play, Disgraced, his principal character, Amir, a Pakistani-American lawyer, admits feeling a “blush of p …
The Mission House by Carys Davies review – a jewel in the hill town Summary: Carys Davies has followed her highly praised debut, West, with another jewel of a novel. Hilary Byrd is a man dogged by “bad days” who seeks refuge in …
Last Night of the Proms review – party falls flat as BBC miss chance to speak up Summary: The decorations on the conductor’s podium weren’t promising. Neatly covered with paper streamers, a single L-plate half-buried among them, it was an o …
In brief: Us Three; Men Who Hate Women: Will My Cat Eat My Eyeballs? – review Us Three Ruth Jones Bantam, £14.99, pp384 The second novel by the co-writer and star of Gavin & Stacey follows three female friends over the course of …
Vinyl records outsell CDs in US for first time since 1980s Vinyl records have outsold CDs in the US for the first time since the 1980s, according to data from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIA …
Head, Hand, Heart by David Goodhart review – let's think practically When my old school went from grammar to comprehensive in 1972, the headmaster, Frank Brewin, felt he should prepare the ground with the existing cohor …
Liz Hyder: 'It’s extraordinary exploitation - kids are still working in mines' Liz Hyder had written six books, none of them published, when bad weather drove her to visit a mine while in north Wales on holiday. Struck and horrif …
Fidelio review – Garsington's semi-staging speaks to us directly and movingly ‘Oh God, what a moment!” Leonore sings in the final scene of Fidelio as she releases Florestan from his chains. Beethoven’s great plea for justice and …
Poem of the week: The Falling by Laura Scott The Falling all those girls their paper knees folding under them and the tree so still and the wind running fingers through the leaves all those girls …
Gerhaher/Huber review - intimate song recital opens Wigmore season Summary: The Wigmore Hall, which kept many of us sane in June with its live-streamed lunchtime series of concerts, is once more leading the way with its autumn …
The Rolling Stones, Springsteen ... The Killers: what actually is 'classic rock'? In the Guide’s weekly Solved! column, we look into a crucial pop-culture question you’ve been burning to know the answer to – and settle it, once and …
'He was a groundbreaker and a visionary': music writer Dele Fadele remembered ‘Dele Fadele was the first black journalist from the UK that ever interviewed me,” says Chuck D of Public Enemy. “I thought that was amazing. And it w …
Not the Booker: The Girl with the Louding Voice by Abi Daré - vibrant Summary: You get a good flavour of the writing in The Girl with the Louding Voice from its opening paragraphs: This morning, Papa call me inside the parlour. H …
Hal Singer obituary The tenor-saxophonist Hal Singer, who has died aged 100, had just joined Duke Ellington’s orchestra in August 1948 – “the greatest musical thrill of m …
'Men still say women aren't funny': Nina Stibbe wins Comedy women in print prize Nina Stibbe has won the Comedy women in print prize for her novel about a teenage dental assistant clawing her way to adulthood in 1980s Leicester, Re …
Troubled Blood by Robert Galbraith review – a cosy blast from the past Robert Galbraith’s Troubled Blood is not for the faint of wrist. Clocking in at a cool 927 pages, the fifth Cormoran Strike novel knocks Hilary Mantel …
The idea of 'too much information' is bad for our health. It's time we ditched it Summary: I have been in pain for more than 20 years. From my very first period I knew something was wrong, but I found it hard to pinpoint what. I asked my fri …
‘Kurt was fit': the night Nirvana played five-a-side with the Chippendales Scottish music manager and promoter David McLean has staged gigs by Nirvana, Green Day, Foo Fighters, Pearl Jam, Oasis and hundreds more. Ahead of his …
Welcome to the New World: Waking Up in Trump's America – review Summary: This book began its life as a weekly comic strip in the New York Times in which the experiences of a group of refugees – the Aldabaan family from Homs …
The Age of Innocence's high drama unfolds in its characters' souls “Modern fiction really began when the ‘action’ of the novel was transferred from the street to the soul,” Edith Wharton wrote in her 1925 book, The Wr …
Beirut's destroyed clubbing district: 'I don't know how we will recover' Summary: Beirut’s people are broken. The catastrophic blast that tore through the port and surrounding areas on 4 August obliterated any remaining optimism in …
Most diverse Booker prize shortlist ever as Hilary Mantel misses out Hilary Mantel will not win a third Booker prize with the final novel in her Thomas Cromwell trilogy, after American writers made a near clean sweep of …
Judging the Booker prize: 'These books are about living under intense pressure' Summary: For the Booker judges, like everyone else, 2020 has been a year of staying in. Luckily for us, we had the company of 162 authors to keep us entertaine …
'We got there!' Cult pop band It's Immaterial back after 27 years Traditionally, it’s second albums that threaten careers: the pressure to repeat or surpass early achievements has provoked many a musician’s downfall. …
Noel Gallagher says he refuses to wear a 'pointless' mask despite UK laws Noel Gallagher has said he refuses to wear a mask during the coronavirus pandemic, complaining that it is a violation of his liberty. Speaking on the …
JK Rowling's Troubled Blood: don't judge a book by a single review Before it had even come out, criticism of JK Rowling’s new Robert Galbraith thriller, Troubled Blood, was already wall-to-wall, after an early review …
Madonna to direct and co-write her own biopic After a nearly four-decade music career, Madonna is getting the biopic treatment under her own direction. The star will co-write and direct the as-yet …
Stephen Hawking by Leonard Mlodinow review – a memoir of friendship We all feel we know the story of Stephen Hawking: his undergraduate years at Oxford; the shocking diagnosis of motor neurone disease when he was 21 an …
'A voice for our emotions': Poland's club scene fights for LGBTQ+ rights In August, as a giant bouncy castle was throwing a shadow on Warsaw’s baroque-style Ujazdów castle – home to the Centre for Contemporary Art – a party …
AG Cook: the nutty producer behind the decade's most divisive music Describing AG Cook’s haircut is a challenge. Part mullet, part moptop, it also features elements of shag, perm and bowl. The more I try to place it th …
Indelicacy by Amina Cain review – a woman's search for creativity “I wanted to write about paintings, but I wasn’t seen as someone who could say something interesting about art” – thus we are introduced to the ambiti …
Notorious BIG's $6 crown sells for almost $600,000 at auction Summary: A plastic crown costing $6 worn by the Notorious BIG has sold for $594,750 (£461,000) at Sotheby’s first ever auction of hip-hop memorabilia. The crow …
Cardi B files for divorce from rapper Offset Cardi B has filed for divorce from rapper husband Offset. The filing was made in Georgia, with an initial hearing set for 4 November. The couple marri …
Top 10 books of autofiction An autofiction is a work of truth; the author is not hiding behind an invented character, she is that character. The character’s spiritual and philoso …
The Beatles announce Get Back, first official book in 20 years Summary: The first official Beatles book since seminal Anthology in 2000 is to be published in August 2021. The Beatles: Get Back will tell the story of the fi …
Late DJ Erick Morillo accused of further sexual assaults Erick Morillo, the dance music star who died early this month, weeks after his arrest for sexual battery, has been accused by numerous other women of …
Black Sabbath's Paranoid at 50: potent anthems of working-class strife Summary: I first heard Black Sabbath’s second album during the part of my childhood when I was most susceptible to its charms. As a quiet, earnest Catholic sch …
Sacked Sheffield cathedral choristers start 'choir in exile' Summary: Choristers of Sheffield cathedral who were abruptly dismissed in June to make way for a “completely fresh start” are launching a new choir led by the …
Richard and the revolutionaries: why did lefties love Wagner? In 1883, the year of Richard Wagner’s death, the theatre critic William Archer noticed a red-haired, bearded youth who was sitting day after day in th …
Is Boris Johnson's 'moonshot' just another shot in the dark? The prime minister’s latest wheeze is to spend £100bn on magic technology that doesn’t exist yet so that everyone in the country can be tested for Cov …
Piranesi by Susanna Clarke review – an elegant study in solitude “The beauty of the House is immeasurable; its Kindness infinite”: this is the reverent pronouncement of Piranesi, who believes he has occupied the hou …
Sault: Untitled (Rise) review – mystery collective make best album of 2020, again Over the last two years, Sault’s music has arrived out of the blue: no interviews, no photos, no videos, no live appearances, no Wikipedia entry, a pe …
Igor Levit review – Beethoven programme affirms deep affinity Igor Levit’s pianism emerges as a force of nature, hence perhaps in part his deep and seemingly fundamental affinity with Beethoven. As Levit returned …
Stille Liebe: Lieder by Schumann review – drama with poise and style In 1840, Schumann was finally able to marry Clara Wieck, and he celebrated his happiness in his songs, composing at least 138 of them, including his f …
Laura Veirs on surviving her divorce: 'My life is strangely awesome' In 2018, as her marriage fell apart, Laura Veirs cried and biked all over Portland. “I called myself the crying cyclist,” she says. It was a new, impe …
Missing voices: guide to female philosophers counters absence in textbooks Summary: Two philosophy graduates are bringing out a book celebrating history’s unsung female philosophers, after realising that most textbooks and guides they …
Bluebird by Malcolm Knox review – vivid characters bring an Aussie beach town to brilliant life Just a short drive from the sprawling suburbs of Sydney lies a beach oasis trapped in the past, populated by men and women in the grips of midlife cri …
V&A and Glastonbury festival to launch new digital archive Most festivalgoers’ memories after Glastonbury are a little hazy – or not fit for public consumption – but London’s V&A museum is preparing to publish …
Diary of an MP’s Wife by Sasha Swire review – a thrillingly indiscreet political memoir Summary: We have come a long way, thankfully, since the days of political wives being expected to stand mutely by their man. But Sasha Swire is still perhaps u …
Ava Max: Heaven & Hell review – turbo-charged 2010s pop joy When Katy Perry’s Smile album recently failed to worry the top of the global charts it apparently rang the death knell for capital P pop. “Life and li …
John Coltrane: Giant Steps 60th Anniversary Edition review – more a giant leap in jazz Within the same few weeks in the spring of 1959, the great saxophonist and composer John Coltrane astonishingly found the composure to play a key role …
Just Like You by Nick Hornby review – ladlit meets mumlit The timing of Nick Hornby’s ninth novel is possibly a little unfortunate. Not only was it written before the Black Lives Matter movement intensified d …
Van Morrison criticises 'fascist bullies' in anti-lockdown Covid songs Summary: Van Morrison has described the British government as “fascist bullies disturbing our peace” in one of three new tracks he has written to protest again …
Big Sean's teenage obsessions: 'Darth Vader wasn’t bad, just misunderstood' Marvel/DC Comics I would go to my best friend’s house in the suburbs and his family were white, so would expose me to a whole different way of living, …
Nina Stibbe: 'I read a few pages of Moby-Dick and switched to Jaws' Summary: The book I am currently reading Dear Reader: The Comfort and Joy of Books by Cathy Rentzenbrink, a glorious part-memoir, part-love letter to books. Th …
The best recent crime and thrillers – review roundup “You can’t imagine how much the world can change in six months,” says one of the narrators of Lauren Beukes’s eerily prescient dystopian thriller, Aft …
'Colourful, vibrant, sensual!' Stars on Jimi Hendrix, 50 years gone Johnny Echols, Love I first met Jimi – he was called Jimmy James then – at the California Club in Los Angeles. He was down on his luck at the time. Hi …
S-X: the Wolverhampton wonderkid loved by Lil Wayne and Rick Ross From his Wolverhampton garden, producer-turned-singer S-X (AKA Sam Gumbley) can survey his kingdom. His dad’s place is round the corner; the high-rise …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 18-25 September Summary: Weekend Concerts at Snape The Doric Quartet kicks off Britten Pears Arts’ latest batch of short concerts, with programmes of Haydn and Mozart, and Moz …
Gerald Durrell honoured with blue plaque at childhood home in London Gerald Durrell is being memorialised with a blue plaque – but not amid the olive groves and sandy beaches of Corfu. Instead, a marker from English Her …
Terry Barfoot obituary My friend, Terry Barfoot, a widely popular music educator, has died of cancer aged 70. The company he built, Arts in Residence, provided music appreci …
Brendan Mulkere obituary My friend and colleague Brendan Mulkere, London-Irish musician, festival-maker, educator, Anglo-Irish connector and red-hot fiddler, has died at the a …
‘How happy he was’: candid David Bowie photographs by his childhood friend It was a conversation that would change Geoff MacCormack’s life forever. In 1973, MacCormack, a musician and childhood friend of David Bowie, got a ph …
Inside Story by Martin Amis review – a curious mashup of fiction and memoir Inside Story is a deeply curious book, in both senses; it asks a lot of questions, and it often asks them oddly. It’s a second go, for a start: a part …
Chloe x Halle: ‘People said our music was too complex for the average ear’ For most people, working from home entails some combination of bad posture, unwashed hair and laundry-based procrastination. For Chloe and Halle Baile …
'Writing was just for fun then': Simon Armitage on writing Zoom! In some versions of my teenage years I had no poetic ambitions whatsoever. In other versions I have a memory of walking around the village fantasising …
Sleaford Mods review – a bracing stream of class consciousness Across town at the Royal Albert Hall, the Last Night of the Proms is under way. In the basement of London’s 100 Club – a famous venue in the annals of …
Tim Garland: Refocus review – a classic 60s fusion revisited Focus was a 1961 album by Stan Getz, wildly adventurous at the time, in which Getz improvised tenor saxophone solos to music composed by Eddie Sauter, …
Owen Jones: 'A lot of people in the parliamentary Labour party are horrible' Owen Jones was born in Sheffield and raised in Stockport. He describes himself as “a fourth-generation socialist” and worked as a trade union and parl …
Compromised review: Peter Strzok on Trump, Russia and the FBI As a deputy assistant director of the FBI’s counter-intelligence division, Peter Strzok led the bureau’s investigation of Russian interference in the …
Express yourself: why Madonna wants to tell her own life story Summary: “It’s essential to share the rollercoaster ride of my life with my voice and my vision,” Madonna said when it was announced by Universal Pictures that …
Safe arias: how opera blazed the trail for the return of live entertainment Britain’s small-scale opera companies have become surprise cultural crusaders this autumn. From urban drive-ins to remote rural settings, it is this m …
Sasha Swire: ‘British politics is totally amateur. That's why it’s so sexy and toxic’ In the kitchen of Chaffcombe Manor, her rambling Devonshire home, Sasha Swire, whose mischievously indiscreet political diaries are published this wee …
A Swayze and the Ghosts: Paid Salvation review – a faultless debut Summary: No one turns to garage punk for its compositional originality. The genre’s evergreen swagger rarely fails to supply uplift, however, and newcomers A S …
Patti Smith: 'I feel the unrest of the world in the pit of my stomach' Patti Smith, rock star, poet, visual artist and writer, won the 2010 National book award with her memoir Just Kids. The Year of the Monkey, her moving …
V2 by Robert Harris review – fears of a rocket man As the second world war hurtled towards its climax, the Nazis summoned up a final, futile burst of creative energy and channelled it into a rocket, th …
In brief: On Earth We're Briefly Gorgeous; Mind Games; Savage Kiss – reviews On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous Ocean Vuong Vintage, £8.99, pp256 (paperback) The central idea in Vuong’s memorable debut novel is love after trauma – …
Alicia Keys: Alicia review – classic and contemporary Following the publication of her memoir in March, Alicia Keys’s seventh album comes from a more personal place than her previous sets. Some tracks are …
AG Cook: Apple review – magical shifts in tone Summary: Last month, the producer AG Cook released his debut album; a 49-track, seven-disc brain dump called 7G. After years honing his synthetic, plastic fant …
Orchestral manoeuvres in a car park: does drive-in opera hit the high notes? Sweaty, hyperventilating and with frozen hands, I arrive at Europe’s first live drive-in opera like Mimi in La Bohème’s last act. Unlike the opera’s h …
Althea Braithwaite obituary Fulfilling the roles of author, illustrator and publisher as well as printer and bookseller, Althea Braithwaite, who has died aged 80, wrote more than …
Rage by Bob Woodward review – Trump unleashed Now I understand why Trump refuses to have a dog in the White House. There’s no need: he is his own fawning poodle and envenomed cur. “I love this guy …
Islands of Mercy by Rose Tremain review – a rich, world-straddling saga Over a distinguished literary career, Rose Tremain has traversed genres with her customary flair, though many readers will associate her primarily wit …
Poem of the week: Before It Is All Gone by Ifigenija Simonović Before It Is All Gone It will be different – nobody will cry, nobody will be cold, nobody will stand at the door, it will be better, for sure. I have …
Drill, hardcore punk and pop about snails: new artists for autumn Bartees Strange Bartees Strange, who combined a full-time job (which he only recently quit) with a stream of releases, is hard to pin down. The Ipswic …
Apartment House review – Julius Eastman's elusive music gets its due Until about five years ago, few on this side of the Atlantic knew much about Julius Eastman’s music. He would have been remembered as a vocalist, espe …
Not the Booker: Akin by Emma Donoghue - daft premise, good writing Summary: Early on in Akin, Emma Donoghue’s 12th novel, we are told that her 79-year-old protagonist Noah took up smoking after the death of his wife because “h …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start with a beauty. Theothebook has been re …
Guess How Much I Love You author Sam McBratney dies aged 77 Sam McBratney, the author of the bestselling picture book Guess How Much I Love You, has died at the age of 77. The Northern Irish author died on 18 S …
Third of British musicians may quit industry amid pandemic Summary: One-third of professional British musicians are considering giving up their careers amid the coronavirus pandemic. A survey of 2,000 members of the Mu …
The Thursday Murder Club by Richard Osman; The Diver and the Lover by Jeremy Vine – review In a recent YouGov survey concerning British TV celebrities, Richard Osman emerged as the ninth most popular telly personality – the words most often …
Young adult books round-up – review Alex Wheatle won the Guardian children’s fiction prize for Crongton Knights, his chronicle of life on a fictional London council estate. Now, his firs …
Northern Ireland health minister criticises Van Morrison anti-lockdown songs Northern Ireland health minister Robin Swann has criticised Van Morrison, after the veteran songwriter condemned coronavirus lockdown measures as “fas …
'Fiery, chaotic and full of emotion': This Heat, the band who tried to change everything Over lockdown, says Charles Hayward, he found his thoughts turning to This Heat, the wildly influential band he played in 40 years ago. It wasn’t the …
Milan Kundera 'joyfully' accepts Czech Republic's Franz Kafka prize Milan Kundera, whose Czech citizenship was restored last year after he had spent more than 40 years in exile, has won one of the Czech Republic’s most …
Blue Ticket by Sophie Mackintosh review – a dark fable about free will There is great power, Sophie Mackintosh has discovered, in taking a familiar thing –so familiar that we no longer see it clearly – moving it to a plac …
Top 10 books about social media Summary: Has anything ever caused a faster transformation in our practices of living than social media? Fifteen years ago, it barely existed; today, it occupie …
Tommy DeVito: Four Seasons founding member dies of Covid aged 92 Tommy DeVito, who co-founded the vocal group that became the Four Seasons, has died aged 92 after contracting Covid-19. DeVito’s bandmates Frankie Val …
Leading UK music industry bodies pledge gender equality on boards A series of major UK music industry organisations have committed to gender equality on their boards. These include PRS for Music, which handles royalt …
Fleet Foxes: 'You can fake a guitar solo. You can't fake your voice' Summary: In June, “when everything was that young green”, Robin Pecknold went driving through upstate New York. Long drives, along empty roads, with the window …
Thurston Moore webchat – your questions answered on black metal, the Fall and the joy of disco Our time is up, sadly. chashumen says: I saw your discussion with Necrobutcher of Mayhem on YouTube. What attracted you to that kind of music? (I’m a …
'The great African novel of the 21st century': Namwali Serpell wins Arthur C Clarke award Summary: Namwali Serpell has won the UK’s top prize for science fiction, the Arthur C Clarke award, for her first novel The Old Drift, which judges described a …
Mercury prize hopefuls Lanterns on the Lake: 'These things don’t happen to bands like us' When Lanterns on the Lake were told they’d been nominated for the 2020 Mercury prize, guitarist Paul Gregory refused to believe it. “Paul was upstairs …
Beyond the Red Wall by Deborah Mattinson and The Northern Question by Tom Hazeldine – review In mid-2019, a former employee of the Conservative party called James Kanagasooriam began looking at recent electoral statistics for parts of England …
House of Music by Kadiatu Kanneh-Mason review – memoir of an extraordinary family Families in Britain comprise on average two children and no prodigies; few, if any, bear resemblance to the Kanneh-Masons. This exceptional household …
Róisín Murphy: Róisín Machine review – still inventing new moves The first thing you hear on Róisín Murphy’s fifth album is a snatch of spoken word, an extract from a monologue that appears in full later. “I feel my …
Novák: Piano conc, Toman and the Wood Nymph etc review –  a composer worth knowing? ‘I will be standing up for Novák from now on,” writes conductor Jakub Hrůša. “Novák is worth knowing about, and we must play his music.” This is Vítěz …
Honeybee by Craig Silvey review – a tender but uncomfortable coming-of-age story The characters that populate Craig Silvey’s novels are highly sensitive, acutely perceptive and imaginative – people hovering on the edge of childhood …
Michael Kiwanuka wins 2020 Mercury prize The 2020 Mercury prize for the year’s best British album has gone to Michael Kiwanuka for his self-titled album, Kiwanuka. “I’m over the moon, so so e …
Last orders! The origins of the word 'curfew' Summary: In June Boris Johnson told the country it was our patriotic duty to go to the pub and spread the coronavirus: that having been an effective message, t …
Jack by Marilynne Robinson review – a Calvinist romance Marilynne Robinson, having attained over the past four decades the status of literature’s spiritual leader, now expands her acclaimed Gilead trilogy i …
The Light Ages by Seb Falk review – banishing the idea of the 'Dark Ages' In Quentin Tarantino’s 1994 Pulp Fiction film, Marcellus Wallace tells Zed that he is going to “get medieval on your ass”. The precise nature of this …
Andrew O'Hagan: 'The last book to make me cry? For the Record by David Cameron' The book I am currently reading I’m having a lovely time with Featherhood by Charlie Gilmour. He is such a tender writer, the book is a magical encoun …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Steps, Lava La Rue, Janelle Monáe Steps What the Future Holds Steps were always the Rice Krispies of millennial pop: beloved but never afforded prime position in the cereal aisle. But …
'I'm extremely controversial': the psychologist rethinking human emotion In early March, as the world began to realise that coronavirus wasn’t going to go quietly, psychology professor Lisa Feldman Barrett was thousands of …
Tory Lanez denies shooting Megan Thee Stallion in new album lyrics Rapper Tory Lanez has denied shooting chart-topping rapper Megan Thee Stallion in a July incident in Los Angeles. On his new album Daystar released to …
Songs about sewage and space travel? It's prog-folk band Hen Ogledd It is about halfway through our video chat that Trouble turns up. While Hen Ogledd officially comprise Dawn Bothwell, Rhodri Davies, Richard Dawson an …
Netflix faces call to rethink Liu Cixin adaptation after his Uighur comments Five Republican US senators have asked Netflix to reconsider its plans to adapt the bestselling Chinese author Liu Cixin’s book The Three-Body Problem …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 25 September to 2 October Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra The RLPO returns to its home in the Philharmonic Hall for an autumn season of live and streamed concerts. The s …
Hilary Mantel: I am 'disappointed but freed' by Booker decision Two-time Booker prize winner Hilary Mantel has said that she is “disappointed” but “freed” after not making this year’s shortlist, congratulating the …
Rishi Sunak's winter economy plan will silence the UK music scene On Thursday, Rishi Sunak announced his Winter Economy Plan, which brings to an end the furlough and self-employed job retention schemes. I agree that …
Jacinta Parsons on living with chronic illness: 'I couldn’t feel my body properly' Like many chronically ill people, Jacinta Parsons was terrified of appearing to be sick. She could date it back to being a three-year-old, when her ap …
Janelle Monáe: ‘What is a revolution without a song?’ Summary: A downside, perhaps, to the sheer imaginative power of Janelle Monáe is that it’s hard not to bring unreasonable expectations to any conversation one …
Hilary Mantel's latest novel is not worthy of the Booker? If that's the way you feel … “Too many debuts/Americans/same names … ” Every year, without fail, the Booker prize shortlist ruffles feathers. Well, not just the shortlist, as we s …
Children’s books roundup – the best new picture books and novels There are many wonderful children’s books published this autumn, but for nine-plus, Jasbinder Bilan’s Tamarind & the Star of Ishta (Chicken House) sta …
Classical home listening: from Tabea Zimmermann to Walter Kaufmann • If you’ve queried the point of listening to a Bach cello suite played on the viola, Tabea Zimmermann’s Solo II (Myrios Classics; released 16 October …
ENO's drive-in La bohème review – honk your horn for Mimi and Rodolfo Mimi’s sickbed is the floor of her transit van. Rodolfo sits hunched against a wheel outside, the closest he dare get to his dying lover. Musetta make …
Fleet Foxes: Shore; Sufjan Stevens: The Ascension review – postcards from the edge Upheaval, transformation, succour: many of us are either actively witnessing – or desperately seeking – these conditions right now. All three states f …
Emmy the Great: 'Live music's going to be weird, but it also might be cathartic' Emma-Lee Moss, 36, has recorded four albums as Emmy the Great, including her forthcoming LP, April /月音, inspired by explorations of her Hong Kong-Chin …
Diana Jones: Song to a Refugee review – tender testimony to bruised lives Brought up in New York by adoptive parents, Diana Jones later traced her birth family to Tennessee and a musician grandfather, and her records have, a …
On my radar: Curtis Sittenfeld's cultural highlights Curtis Sittenfeld has written six novels, including the bestsellers Prep and American Wife. Born in Cincinnati, Ohio, she studied at Stanford Universi …
Marilynne Robinson: 'America still has a democratic soul' Summary: Marilynne Robinson is an American novelist and essayist. One of Barack Obama’s favourite authors, she won the Pulitzer prize for fiction in 2005 for h …
Disloyal: A Memoir by Michael Cohen review – disgraced Trump lawyer's kiss and tell In summer 2012, Michael Cohen took his family to a golf resort owned by Donald Trump in New Jersey. By this point, he had been working as Trump’s lawy …
Cultural revolutions: how dub reggae’s beats conquered 70s Britain Music producer Mad Professor has been mixing dub reggae in his Croydon studio for 35 years. “When dub hits you in the chest you feel it,” he said. “It …
Diary of an MP's Wife by Sasha Swire review – candid account of a Tory clique There’s a scene in Sasha Swire’s Diary of an MP’s Wife, an insider’s account of the Tory clique that has ruled Britain for the past decade, which some …
Top authors hope you’ll give this book away to change young lives Books are some of the most powerful objects in existence – and, when they are given away to others, have an infinite capacity to change lives. That is …
Indelicacy by Amina Cain review – a room of her own Summary: Amina Cain’s short debut novel is easy enough to outline. Vitória works as a cleaner in an art gallery until she marries a wealthy man and can dedicat …
In brief: The Harpy; The Bookseller's Tale; Make It Scream, Make It Burn – review Summary: The Harpy Megan Hunter Picador, £14.99, pp256 With “rage moms” being touted as a political force in the forthcoming US election, Megan Hunter’s potent …
To deny children the simple joy of riding a bike is an abdication of our parental responsibilities I got my first bike when I was nine years old, an iridescent purple Malvern Star Roadster with Marlon handlebars, a red banana seat, white-walled tyre …
When comfort reading won't cut it: books to restore hope in humanity The most hopeful thing about books is that they exist. Is it not a miracle to look at a shelf and see the vast range of human experience laid out befo …
Poem of the week: Huia by Bill Manhire Summary: Huia I was the first of birds to sing I sang to signal rain the one I loved was singing and singing once again My wings were made of sunlight my tail …
Heart Shaped Music Box? Mariah Carey reveals secret 90s grunge project With her immaculate, glamorous image, Mariah Carey is the last person you’d expect to don a plaid shirt, ripped denim and mope over a squall of electr …
Not the Booker: Hamnet by Maggie O'Farrell - a moving portrayal of grief Summary: It takes a brave writer to put words in William Shakespeare’s mouth. In Hamnet, Maggie O’Farrell almost gets away with it. Her eighth novel – which ha …
American classics among most ‘challenged’ books of the decade in US Summary: Mark Twain, John Steinbeck and Harper Lee might be three of America’s most beloved authors, but they have all made it on to a list of the country’s 10 …
France divided over calls for Arthur Rimbaud and Paul Verlaine to be reburied in Panthéon Summary: France’s cultural elite are split over whether the remains of two of the country’s greatest poets, Arthur Rimbaud and his lover Paul Verlaine, should …
Give up Google, don't hit 'accept all': how to fight for your privacy “If you’re reading this book, you probably already know your personal data is being collected, stored and analysed,” Carissa Véliz begins, in Privacy …
Richard Flanagan: 'Despair is always rational, but hope is human' Summary: About half an hour into our conversation, I ask Richard Flanagan what gives him hope. There’s a pause down the phone line, the hiss of empty, mechanic …
Cole's Book Arcade was Melbourne's literary funhouse, but its creator was truly inspirational Summary: Melbourne history buffs might know of Cole’s Book Arcade, the magnificent three-storey bookshop that could be found in what is now the Bourke Street M …
'I need to spread love with the gifts God gave me': funk master Steve Arrington returns Yellow Springs, Ohio, is buzzing, despite it being a weekday afternoon in a pandemic. When Steve Arrington and I meet at a cafe on the town’s main str …
Dirt by Bill Buford review – unstinting and endlessly curious It has taken Bill Buford a long time to give us Dirt. His last book, Heat, which detailed his macho adventures in the Italian kitchen, came out in 200 …
Music is an act of communication. Without anyone listening it doesn't exist After seven months of musical silence, I feel very fortunate to be giving a public concert this week with the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra. The aud …
Postcolonial Love Poem by Natalie Diaz review – fearless, sinuous and breathtaking Natalie Diaz was born and raised in the Fort Mojave Indian Village in Needles, California. She grew up on the banks of the Colorado river and water is …
Nominate your favourite book for the final Reading group This October will be the final month of the Guardian’s Reading group in its current form, so let’s go out with a bang. I want to celebrate the fact th …
Number of young adult writers of colour doubles to almost 20% Summary: The proportion of authors of colour writing for young adults in the UK has more than doubled in the last two years. Research from University College L …
Tommy DeVito obituary No As a founding member of the US vocal quartet the Four Seasons, Tommy DeVito, who has died aged 92 of Covid 19, made history by being in the first g …
Craig Silvey on writing from a trans perspective: 'A novelist is required to listen, to learn' Art imitates life in the opening scene of Craig Silvey’s latest novel, Honeybee. A transgender teenager, feeling helpless and alone, leans out from a …
Helen Reddy, Australian singer of feminist anthem I Am Woman, dies aged 78 Helen Reddy, the Australian singer best known for her anthemic 1972 hit I Am Woman, has died at 78. Reddy had been diagnosed with dementia in 2015 and …
Michael Rosen on his Covid-19 coma: ‘It felt like a pre-death, a nothingness’ “I’m drinking lemon tea,” Michael Rosen says. “Would you like some? It’s what my mother used to call Russian tea, by the way.” And before I am through …
Bob Mould, alt-rock's gay icon, takes on American evil: 'My head's on fire!' It’s been a fortnight since Bob Mould could open his windows. “The air is pretty toxic,” he reports from his home in San Francisco, as the California …
Schubert: where to start with his music He composed more than 600 songs – taking the art of writing German Lieder to a new plane – as well as seven completed symphonies, chamber music and pi …
The Haunting of Alma Fielding by Kate Summerscale review – a terrific true ghost story Summary: In the late 1930s something strange was happening in the semis and terraces of suburban Britain. Tables bucked and strange stigmata appeared on the bo …
More than 200 writers and publishers sign letter in support of trans and non-binary people Days after a host of prominent literary names signed a letter defending JK Rowling “against hate”, more than 200 writers, publishers and journalists i …
Top 10 verse novels Summary: Verse novels have been with us for millennia, yet when you publish one, many are surprised by your breach of the prose-novel tradition and also somewh …
Helen Reddy obituary Summary: Every social movement has its definitive song, and feminism got its anthem in 1972, when the Australian singer Helen Reddy released the single I Am Wo …
Guardian Australia's book club: join Jimmy Barnes for a chat about music, memoir and precious moments When singer Jimmy Barnes’ memoir Working Class Boy was released in 2016, it caused a sensation. Barnes’ account of his childhood went beyond the usual …
Tom Stoppard: A Life by Hermione Lee review – an exceptional biography In The Invention of Love, Tom Stoppard has his Oscar Wilde character describe biography as “the mesh through which our real life escapes”. Quoting tha …
Hey Hi Hello by Annie Nightingale review – five decades of pop gusto Irvine Welsh once wrote that Annie Nightingale was less a DJ and more “a surrogate cool big sister” to disaffected teenagers. “When the flatulent soun …
AC/DC reunite, featuring three former members AC/DC have announced a reunion, featuring members who had left the classic rock band in recent years. A new post on their Instagram account depicts vo …
Happiness, a Mystery by Sophie Hannah review – solving the most profound puzzle What if we brought a detective’s logic to bear on the search for happiness? In this book, the bestselling crime writer Sophie Hannah sifts the evidenc …
From cut-out confessions to cheese pages: browse the world's strangest books Edward Brooke-Hitching grew up in a rare book shop, with a rare book dealer for a father. As the author of histories of maps The Phantom Atlas, The Go …
Entitled by Kate Manne review – how male privilege hurts women This book doesn’t let up. What starts as a series of anecdotes about male privilege and how it motivates men to act in violent ways develops into a na …
Horse Meat Disco: 'A naked clubber became our mascot. He had his cigarettes in his socks' Every club night has its defining “were you there?” moment and, for Horse Meat Disco (HMD), it was Kate Bush and a lot of dry ice on New Year’s Day 20 …
I Will Walk With My Love review – gifted soprano finds depth and dancing in folk-classical debut Summary: At a time when many opera singers are out of work and chances to hear the full-throttle human voice in all its glory are few, a new recital disc as go …
Elvis Costello's teenage obsessions: 'I had a massive crush on Judi Dench in 1966' Talking to a Stranger My view of the world was coloured by the fact that my parents separated, and I used to go to the movies – the pictures as we cal …
All Our Shimmering Skies by Trent Dalton review – a quest fable follow-up to Boy Swallows Universe Molly Hook, the gravedigger’s daughter, has a heart on the verge of turning to stone. When her mother dies she is left to fend for herself against her …
Elton John voices support for face masks after being accused of breaking rules Elton John’s spokesperson has said the singer is “fully supportive of wearing a mask in public” after he was accused of flouting face mask rules durin …
Covid-19 infections are now increasing 'exponentially' - but what does that mean? Summary: The prime minister has warned that Covid-19 infections are now increasing “exponentially”. That sounds technical, but should we be frightened? The Lat …
The Devil and the Dark Water by Stuart Turton review – irresistible maritime mystery The Seven Deaths of Evelyn Hardcastle – a curiously invigorating mix of genres described by its publishers as “Gosford Park meets Inception, by way of …
Blackpink: The Album review – brilliance from the world's biggest girl band Summary: In some benighted corners of the internet, the big news a couple of weeks ago was the latest battle in the ongoing war between fans of South Korean bo …
Snowdrops: Volutes review – musical studies from the edge of humanity Summary: While working as a radio operator during the first world war, Maurice Martenot became fascinated by the pure sine waves that were accidentally produce …
Red Pill by Hari Kunzru review – a timely take on reality The title of Hari Kunzru’s sixth novel is taken from the famous scene in The Matrix where protagonist Neo is offered a choice: the red pill will allow …
Working Men's Club review – synthpop of every stripe on outstanding debut LP The Golden Lion pub in Todmorden gives locals the chance to meet and talk about the high number of UFO sightings in the isolated West Yorkshire town. …
RLPO/Petrenko review – maximum impact for bold start to virtual season The Royal Liverpool Philharmonic’s autumn season in its home base is a mixture of online-only performances and concerts with socially distanced audien …
Petina Gappah: 'Last book to make me laugh? The cheese chapter in Three Men in a Boat' Summary: The book I am currently reading Belonging, the second part of Simon Schama’s magisterial series The Story of the Jews. The books that changed my life …
Why Radiohead are the Blackest white band of our times Ask anyone who is the Blackest white rock band to emerge over the past 30 years, and my hunch is that few would say Radiohead. The hypnotically wonky …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Sam Smith, James Blake, Justin Bieber Sam Smith Diamonds Diamonds is told from inside an acrimonious breakup: the messy enmeshing of love and finances. “Take all the money you want from me …
How I learned to love being an Essex girl In the kingdom of the East Saxons, towards the end of the seventh century, the noblewoman Ethelburga founded an abbey in a place they called Berecingu …
D (A Tale of Two Worlds) by Michel Faber review – fantasy that fails to fly Every morning, the heroine of Michel Faber’s new book wakes in her cosy bed on the south coast of England. Dhikilo leads what might look like an ordin …
Susie Dent 'gutted' after new book Word Perfect printed with host of typos Countdown’s resident lexicographer Susie Dent has testified to the effectiveness of lalochezia, or “the use of swearing to alleviate stress and frustr …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 2 to 9 October Elias Quartet Leamington Music returns in a new venue. Beethoven is the common denominator between the Elias Quartet’s two programmes: in their late a …
Derek Mahon, Belfast-born giant of Irish poetry, dies aged 78 Summary: Derek Mahon, the Belfast-born poet who became an immense figure in Irish poetry with poems such as A Disused Shed in Co Wexford and Courtyards in Delf …
95 books and counting: finding solace in reading through the year of Covid Summary: Rachel Krasky has read 95 books this year. That’s about 2.5 a week. The 30-year-old communications manager has always been a voracious reader, but Mel …
The International Brigades by Giles Tremlett review – fighting fascism in Spain Summary: “We shall not forget you,” promised the famous Spanish communist known as La Pasionaria, addressing the surviving International Brigades as they depar …
Aspiring writers, enter that prize. Even if you don't win, you'll be seen Writing prizes are massively important for aspiring and emerging writers. I think they are vastly more important than literary prizes. So many aspirin …
Kae Tempest: what I have learned from 20 years on the mic Summary: James Joyce told me once: “In the particular is contained the universal.” I appreciated the advice. It taught me that the closer attention I pay to my …
The Thursday Murder Club by Richard Osman review – cosy crime caper So now we know what Pointless creator Richard Osman has been up to behind that laptop: drawing on his passion for classic English crime fiction for hi …
'Writing a novel is like wading through wet sand, at night, in a storm': John Banville on The Sea Summary: At what moment can the composition of a novel be said to have begun? Nabokov claimed he felt the first tingling caress of Lolita when he read a newspa …
One to watch: Wesley Joseph Since emerging earlier this year with his self-produced debut single, the skittering, jazz-flecked Imaginary Friends, 23-year-old rapper-singer Wesley …
On my radar: Michael Morpurgo's cultural highlights Born in St Albans in 1943, Michael Morpurgo is the author of over 100 books, including the bestselling children’s novels War Horse, Private Peaceful a …
Diana Krall: This Dream of You review – second to none The song is But Beautiful. Diana Krall sings the first chorus and then comes a guitar solo. As it begins, a string orchestra joins in, playing the mel …
Jennifer Nansubuga Makumbi: 'Life is about making myth' Summary: Jennifer Nansubuga Makumbi was born in Kampala, Uganda, in 1967, and now lives in Manchester. Her first novel, Kintu, was longlisted for the Etisalat …
Tom Stoppard: A Life review – smuggling heart into a scholar's story “I simply don’t like revealing myself,” Tom Stoppard once said. “I am a very private sort of person.” It takes a persistent, unflappable and penetrati …
How a TV baseball movie inspired late Lennon love song A month before he was shot dead in December 1980, John Lennon recorded the song Grow Old With Me, its lyrics drawn from a Robert Browning poem. Inspir …
Hilary Mantel: 'Being a novelist is no fun. But fun isn’t high on my list' As soon as the third volume of her Wolf Hall trilogy was out in the world, Hilary Mantel returned to her Devon study to give The Mirror and the Light …
Blue Note Re:imagined – a rollercoaster tribute Jazz players frequently hold hands across the generations. This 16-track compilation finds today’s youthful, often London-based renaissance in dialogu …
Piranesi by Susanna Clarke review – byzantine and beguiling Piranesi lives in the House. He knows the House intimately, every one of its 7,678 Halls. He knows also the number of those who have ever existed: 15. …
Jill Lepore: 'When did we hand Google, Twitter and Facebook the reins?' Jill Lepore is professor of American history at Harvard and a prolific essayist for the New Yorker. Her books have included These Truths, a 900-page c …
Jónsi: Shiver review – ethereal steel for strange times Twenty-six years into an experimental career where he’s still generally thought of as the indie boy Enya, Jónsi Birgisson has recruited a 30-year-old …
In brief: Beyond the Red Wall; The Golden Age of British Short Stories 1890-1914; Inside the Beautiful Inside – reviews Beyond the Red Wall Deborah Mattinson Biteback, £16.99, pp278 If Keir Starmer wants to understand why Labour lost its “red wall” seats at the last ele …
Less hotel, more gentrified flophouse: The Albion Rooms, Margate – review At some point we’re going to have to confront the idea of whether the Libertines’ new venture The Albion Rooms is a hotel or not, so we may as well do …
A Journey Through the Rake’s Progress review – whistle-stop tour of Stravinsky Summary: Who knows – this potted version of The Rake’s Progress, produced by Blackheath Halls Opera, might just start a fashion for similarly abbreviated onlin …
Music festivals plan for phased return in 2021 after Covid wipeout Summary: Thermo scanners, interactive wristbands that vibrate to mark a lack of social distancing, and rapid on-site testing are all being considered by music …
Melanie C: Melanie C review – a genuine statement Pop stars love to say they’re finally “the real me”, although the declaration often straddles some pretty generic music. Melanie C’s eighth album feel …
Breasts and Eggs by Mieko Kawakami review – strange and ruthlessly honest It’s not often that a book comes garlanded with both lavish praise and laughable criticism, but Breasts and Eggs has been labelled “breathtaking” by H …
It Takes Blood and Guts by Skin with Lucy O'Brien review – memoir of a musical maverick In 1998, Nelson Mandela celebrated his 80th birthday. Among the guests were Stevie Wonder, Nina Simone, Michael Jackson – and Skunk Anansie, the Briti …
Poem of the week: Oh wert thou in the cauld blast  by Robert Burns Oh wert thou in the cauld blast Oh wert thou in the cauld blast, On yonder lea, on yonder lea; My plaidie to the angry airt, I’d shelter thee, I’d she …
Kae Tempest publishes first book since revealing they are non-binary The award-winning poet and musician Kae Tempest has published their first work since announcing they are non-binary, a meditation on creativity and co …
Pillow Queens: 2020's most exciting indie-rockers on Catholicism, coming out and community When I meet Dublin band Pillow Queens in a pub and pizza place in the city in August, the conversation ranges from the city’s housing crisis to the ca …
Akwaeke Emezi shuns Women's prize over request for details of sex as defined 'by law' Summary: Akwaeke Emezi, who became the first non-binary transgender author to be nominated for the Women’s prize in 2019, has said that they will not let their …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. Let’s start with some big hitters. FrogCDE has jus …
Unseen spoof by Raymond Chandler shows writer's 'human side' Best known for his hardboiled stories starring private detective Philip Marlowe, a more playful side of Raymond Chandler is set to be revealed in a pr …
Wigmore Hall announce lockdown commissions: 'we want new voices' Summary: The Wigmore Hall today announces a search for new voices to offer their perspective on this extraordinary year. The central London concert hall is lau …
Nobel prize for literature tipped to make safe pick after years of scandal Summary: Jamaica Kincaid and Anne Carson have been tipped as possible winners of this week’s Nobel prize for literature, with the secretive jury expected to pl …
Charges against Tsitsi Dangarembga must be dropped, argue writers Authors including Kazuo Ishiguro, Carol Ann Duffy and Philippe Sands have called for charges against the Booker prize-shortlisted writer Tsitsi Dangar …
The Haunting of Alma Fielding by Kate Summerscale review – a ghost in the house Summary: In Elizabeth Bowen’s story The Demon Lover, set in London during the blitz, a middle-aged married woman climbs into a taxi. Her relief is palpable. Sh …
Total legend: does Mariah Carey really not ‘do stairs’? Last week Mariah Carey finally released her long-awaited memoir, The Meaning of Mariah Carey (unfortunately she used the better title, Memoirs of an I …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup Summary: Three-Fifths John Vercher Pushkin Vertigo, £12.99, pp256 In 1995 Pittsburgh, 22-year-old Bobby Saraceno’s best friend, Aaron, has just got out of pris …
Plagiarism case over Led Zeppelin's Stairway to Heaven finally ends Summary: Led Zeppelin have prevailed in a long-standing copyright battle over their signature song, Stairway to Heaven. The US supreme court has declined to he …
'You're left to rot if you speak up': the abuse faced by female roadies Sandwich-maker. Foot-rubber. Mother. Eye candy. Enabler. Subordinate. Weakling. Women and non-binary (NB) touring crew members have heard it all while …
Reading group: A Brief History of Seven Killings by Marlon James is our October book Summary: A Brief History of Seven Killings by Marlon James has come out of the hat and will be our reading group choice for October. This decades-spanning nove …
Mallrat, Powderfinger, Flowerkid and Cry Club: Australia's best new music for October Summary: Powderfinger – Day By Day For fans of: Powderfinger! Like Bernard Fanning’s happiness, Powderfinger have spent this year slowly creeping back (into th …
To the End of the World by Rupert Everett review – a delightful writer on modern fame There are, for reasons both simple and obvious, certain literary figures who inspire a kind of hero worship that invariably says a lot more about the …
The Animals in That Country by Laura Jean McKay review – an extraordinary debut Wittgenstein wrote that “If a lion could speak, we could not understand him.” In her fierce debut novel, Australian Laura Jean McKay sets herself an e …
Top 10 underrated Agatha Christie novels In 2013, when I was first asked by Agatha Christie’s family to write a new Hercule Poirot mystery (I have since written three more), I decided I neede …
Gail MacColl Jarrett obituary My wife, Gail MacColl Jarrett, who has died aged 66 of multiple myeloma, was an author, editor and relationship counsellor. She edited two New York Ti …
I Wanna Be Yours by John Cooper Clarke review - wry and dry When the teenage John Cooper Clarke announced he wanted to be a poet, his alarmed parents asked for examples of people who had made a living from it. …
Debussy: where to start with his music Summary: It was a description he always rejected, but Claude Debussy (1862-1918) is often thought of as an impressionist, a musical equivalent to Monet or Reno …
Cardi B apologises for supporting Armenia fundraiser after backlash She has taken on fellow pop stars Nicki Minaj, Miley Cyrus and Azealia Banks in high-profile feuds. But confrontational rapper Cardi B is backing down …
Bunny 'Striker' Lee, Jamaican reggae producer, dies aged 79 Jamaican producer Bunny “Striker” Lee, who helped cultivate rhythms of reggae and dub working with many of the island’s biggest stars, has died aged 7 …
Eddie Van Halen obituary The death of Eddie Van Halen from throat cancer, aged 65, brings to a close one of the most colourful and lucrative sagas in American rock music. If A …
'The measures': yet more bland bureaucracy from the government The increasingly complex constellation of Covid-19 restrictions for various parts of the country, which the prime minister can’t be bothered to memori …
The Abstainer by Ian McGuire review – 'The Wire by gaslight' Ian McGuire’s gripping historical thriller reminds us that long before the Guildford Four and the Birmingham Six, there were the Manchester Three. In …
Pandora's Jar by Natalie Haynes review – rescuing women in Greek myths Summary: It was actually a Roman mythological figure that compelled Natalie Haynes, author of the Women’s prize-shortlisted A Thousand Ships, to make female ch …
The Nine Lives of Pakistan by Declan Walsh review – first-rate reportage Declan Walsh begins his captivating new book on Pakistan with an account of how he came to leave the country for the first time, abruptly and involunt …
D-Block Europe: The Blueprint – Us vs Them review – UK rap stars box themselves in Last year, Young Adz, one half of D-Block Europe, claimed that the Lewisham duo had amassed a cache of 700 unreleased tracks. On the face of it, that …
Louise Glück wins the 2020 Nobel prize in literature The poet Louise Glück has become the first American woman to win the Nobel prize for literature in 27 years, cited for “her unmistakable poetic voice …
Johnny Nash obituary Summary: In the decades since the song I Can See Clearly Now was written and recorded by Johnny Nash, many have used its uplifting lyrics to help themselves ou …
Bournemouth SO/Brabbins review – energy, panache and a rarity discovered The Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra’s chief conductor Kirill Karabits comes from Ukraine, and during his tenure on the south coast he has made a point …
Monteverdi: L'Orfeo review –  Toro brings expressive colour but extremes of tempo A decade ago, new recordings of the earliest of all operatic masterpieces seemed almost commonplace, but this studio recording of Monteverdi’s favola …
Sorrow and Bliss by Meg Mason review – an incredibly funny and devastating debut When the reader is first introduced to Martha, the acerbic, straight-talking narrator of Sorrow and Bliss, she is thinking about a wedding held “short …
Louise Glück: where to start with an extraordinary Nobel winner I have been reading Louise Glück for more than 20 years, longer than the many poets whose star has risen and waned in the meantime; longer than I’ve b …
Louise Glück: Colm Tóibín on a brave and truthful Nobel winner In Stanford in 2008, the Irish poet Eavan Boland told me how much she admired the work of Louise Glück. She took down some volumes of her poetry from …
'We lost ourselves': Future Islands, the synthpop band who nearly blew it Summary: “I’ve definitely done some journaling up here,” says Samuel T Herring. “A lot of lyrics too. It’s a great place for letting the mind wander.” We’re sa …
Venom Prison: Primeval review – potent disgust from Welsh death metallers With their gleefully hardcore, socially astute take on death metal, Venom Prison have been responsible for some of the most energising extreme music o …
Death in Her Hands by Ottessa Moshfegh review – meandering murder mystery A dynamic and wonderfully mercurial writer, Ottessa Moshfegh has defied ideas of genre, appropriate subject matter and character “likability” to creat …
'Open that door or I'll blow it down!' The jazz legends who caused TV mayhem Fifty years ago this week, all hell broke loose on Dick Cavett’s US talkshow. The host was interviewing the British actor Trevor Howard before a live …
Derek Mahon obituary Derek Mahon, who has died aged 78, was one of the great poets of his native Ireland and of the English-speaking world. He was routinely discussed alon …
Christopher Eccleshall obituary Summary: My father, Chris Eccleshall, who has died aged 72, was one of the world’s leading designers and makers of guitars, and the go-to repairer for many wel …
Pamela Erskine obituary My mother, Pamela Erskine, who has died aged 87, was a career librarian and a shining example of the postwar belief that people can collectively make …
In dialogue with Mozart: composer's violin brought back to life When he first dared ask the keepers of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s violin if he might be allowed to try it out, Christoph Koncz had no idea where the qu …
Sayaka Murata: 'I acted how I thought a cute woman should act - it was horrible' Until recently, Sayaka Murata, who won Japan’s most prestigious literary award, the Akutagawa prize, worked in a convenience store. She had toiled in …
Why Kanye West's fight for his masters marks a changing music industry Summary: In September, Kanye West took to Twitter to declare the music industry (and NBA) “modern day slave ships”, as he sought to regain the rights to his ma …
Stephen King, Margaret Atwood and Roxane Gay champion trans rights in open letter Stephen King and Margaret Atwood are among the signatories to an open letter offering support to the trans and non-binary communities of the US and Ca …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 9 to 16 October Summary: In the Market for Love First staged outdoors two months ago, Glyndebourne now takes its production of Offenbach’s farcical one-acter into the opera ho …
Mohammad Reza Shajarian embodied the timeless beauty of Persian music I vividly remember the first time I met Mohammad Reza Shajarian on a summer afternoon in Berlin in 2011. He was touring Europe, along with his daughte …
Blake Scott: Niscitam review – Peep Tempel frontman's sprawling and powerful solo debut A pub-punk frontman known for acerbic character studies, Blake Scott specialises in prodding and puncturing the clichés of Australian culture. After a …
Jimmy Barnes: ‘It’s criminal the way the government has treated the arts’ Australian rock star Jimmy Barnes is not known for his subtlety, either in music or in life – and he was characteristically forthright on Friday after …
At the drive-in: has Hockey Dad revealed the future of Australian live music? Summary: If drive-in concerts could make enough of a buck for concert promoters to pursue them (they can’t), Wollongong band the Pinheads’ appeal on Friday to …
What Were We Thinking review: Carlos Lozada on why Trump books matter A long time ago, 10 years or more, I worked nights on the Guardian sports desk. The shift started at 11pm and by 4am there was no more to do. But ther …
Nonfiction is just as rich and illuminating as fiction - and I'm a novelist While I’m writing fiction, I try to read only nonfiction. I need real life, real feelings, real people to give me texture, as a backdrop to sitting at …
The SS Officer's Armchair by Daniel Lee review – the life of an 'ordinary Nazi' In 2011, having just completed research on the experiences of Jews in Vichy France, Daniel Lee met a Dutch student who told him a remarkable story. He …
1968: the year that set the world on fire In the summer of 1968 I was 16 years old and, in retrospect, those months appear significant for me only because I had sat my O-level examinations, an …
John Lanchester: 'We should treat reading more like sex and drugs' John Lanchester’s career is a mix of prize-winning novels and popular nonfiction, with a regular output of journalism that straddles literature, finan …
The Man Who Ran Washington review: James Baker as Republican titan from an age long gone James Addison Baker III served as White House chief of staff, treasury secretary and secretary of state. He helped elect Ronald Reagan in 1980, skippe …
To the End of the World by Rupert Everett review – witty memoir of a Wilde life Rupert Everett was five years old when he first heard the name Oscar Wilde. Tucked up in bed beneath the gables of a pink farmhouse somewhere in deepe …
How Soviet spies targeted George Orwell during Spanish civil war They had a common enemy in General Franco’s fascist-backed army, but that did not stop legions of communists, revolutionaries and anarchists in 1930s …
Emmy the Great: April / 月音 review – a quest for belonging There’s both pathos and power in not quite belonging to any one place: born and raised in Hong Kong, Emma-Lee Moss found fame in London before moving …
In brief: Troy; Home Stretch; Three Hours – reviews Troy Stephen Fry Michael Joseph, £20, pp432 Following his bestselling books on Greek mythology, Mythos and Heroes, Fry returns with an inimitable rete …
Future Islands: As Long As You Are review – intensely moving If there’s one moment that Baltimore synth-poppers Future Islands are likely to be remembered for, it’s frontman Samuel T Herring’s brilliantly impass …
Janet Freer obituary My mother, Janet Freer, who has died aged 89, was a literary agent for science-fiction writers in the 1960s and 70s. She helped launch the careers of …
'There is no planet B': the best books to help us navigate the next 50 years As wildfires burn in the western United States and the second wave of Covid-19 sweeps across the world, it’s becoming impossible to ignore the disaste …
The Contradictions by Sophie Yanow review – on the road with a raging bore This comic, the original web version of which has already received an Eisner award, arrives with high praise both from Alison Bechdel, the bestselling …
Poem of the week: The Bread of Childhood by Ihor Pavlyuk The Bread of Childhood Grandmother’s pyrohy oozing cherries, the soil Fragrant with spring, These are the heart’s embroidered memories Touched by the …
Deep Purple's Ian Gillan at 75: 'I can't pole vault any more!' Summary: You might think Ian Gillan, at 75 years old, would be fed up with singing Smoke on the Water. After all, he’s had to sing it at pretty much every show …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. To begin, an autumnal reward for einekleinenachtmu …
Jackie Shipster obituary Summary: My wife, Jackie Shipster, who has died aged 70, was an actor, pianist and music teacher, who used singing to help those with dementia and brain injury …
Tim Wilkinson obituary My friend Tim Wilkinson, who has died aged 73, was a translator of Hungarian literature into English, notably of the work of the Nobel laureate Imre K …
The Wanted singer Tom Parker diagnosed with inoperable brain tumour Tom Parker, singer with chart-topping British boyband the Wanted, has been diagnosed with an inoperable brain tumour. The 32-year-old said he was “sti …
BBC's The Watch 'shares no DNA with Terry Pratchett's work', says daughter Terry Pratchett’s daughter Rhianna Pratchett has said that the forthcoming television adaptation of the late author’s stories about Ankh-Morpork’s Cit …
In the Market for Love review – first-rate singers elevate flimsy one-acter The sound of tuning from an orchestra pit has never been so welcome as it currently is in Glyndebourne. In August this was one of the first UK opera c …
Aria awards 2020: Lime Cordiale, Tame Impala and Sampa the Great lead nominations Summary: Pop duo Lime Cordiale, one-man band Tame Impala and hip-hop powerhouse Sampa the Great are set for a promising awards season, with each raking in mult …
BTS faces China backlash over Korean war comments K-pop phenomenon BTS are facing a barrage of criticism in China after the South Korean boyband cited their country’s solidarity with the US stemming f …
'We lived a life of terror': bassist Leon Bosch on making his peace with South Africa As a person of colour growing up in South Africa in the 1970s, double bass player Leon Bosch was scarred physically and mentally by the country’s apar …
Pandora's Jar by Natalie Haynes review – ancient misogyny For the past few years, Natalie Haynes has been building a career out of rescuing the women of the ancient world from obscurity or cliche. Her most re …
Earthlings by Sayaka Murata review – compellingly weird Japanese writer Sayaka Murata scored an international bestseller with her last novel, Convenience Store Woman, a brilliantly observed story of a neuro …
Eritrean poet Amanuel Asrat named International Writer of Courage The Eritrean poet Amanuel Asrat, who was arrested in 2001 and is believed still to be detained in a maximum security prison, has been named Internatio …
Midnight Oil win Sydney Peace Foundation's gold medal for human rights Australian band Midnight Oil will be awarded the gold medal for human rights by the Sydney Peace Foundation for its “commitment to the pursuit of huma …
‘Loud and proud, wrong and strong’: the ‘Yolŋu surf rock’ of Yothu Yindi’s next generation The music of Yothu Yindi, says King Stingray guitarist Roy Kellaway, is in his blood. He and the brand new band’s singer, Yirrnga Yunupiŋu, grew up to …
Stevie Nicks on art, ageing and attraction: ‘Botox makes it look like you’re in a satanic cult!’ Stevie Nicks has been taking the pandemic even more seriously than most. She has barely left her home in Los Angeles this year. “My assistant, God ble …
Picturebook legend Oliver Jeffers: 'I've got my wife's bite marks tattooed on my finger' Summary: Oliver Jeffers is talking about his many, many tattoos. He has sold millions of picture books all over the world – beautifully drawn creations about, …
My Life in Red and White by Arsène Wenger review – what was his secret? In December 1997, Arsène Wenger’s Arsenal team were beaten 3-1 at home by Blackburn Rovers, and the players were booed off the pitch by the home fans, …
Reproduction by Ian Williams review – fallout of an unlikely affair For decades novelists have mined the rich dramatic potential of pioneering black-and-white relationships, scarred by the collective memory of slavery, …
Top 10 books about creative writing The poet Rita Dove was once asked what makes poetry successful. She went on to illuminate three key areas: First, the heart of the writer; the things …
Governments are failing Black students – and rappers are picking up the slack This week, US rapper Megan Thee Stallion launched the Don’t Stop scholarship in partnership with Amazon Music, giving two women of colour $10,000 each …
Failosophy by Elizabeth Day review – the feel-good 'failing-well' industry Elizabeth Day’s 2019 book How to Fail, a winning blend of memoir and self-help, set out to prove Truman Capote’s assertion that “failure is the condim …
Idles v Fat White Family: what the indie showdown tells us about class On the face of it, two British indie bands being locked in a war of words about class-consciousness might seem like egoistic farce. On deeper consider …
Elton John and ex-wife Renate Blauel settle legal dispute Summary: Sir Elton John and his ex-wife, Renate Blauel, have settled a legal case brought after details of the marriage were featured in the singer’s memoir an …
Dance music platform Resident Advisor defends £750,000 government grant A dance music website and events company that will receive £750,000 as part of the government’s arts support grant scheme has defended its application …
DBC Pierre’s smartphone era novel leads Goldsmiths prize shortlist The latest novel from Booker winner DBC Pierre, which splits its pages into two columns to represent the cacophony of a smartphone-obsessed world, has …
K-Pop band BTS scores huge hit on South Korea stock market in management firm's IPO Summary: The management company behind the popular South Korean boy band BTS has scored a huge hit on the country’s stock market after its shares doubled on th …
TS Eliot prize unveils 'unsettling, captivating' shortlist Summary: The prestigious TS Eliot prize has revealed a shortlist that shows that poetry is “the most resilient, potent, capacious and universal art we have”. A …
Dishing the Dirt by Nick Duerden review – the hidden lives of house cleaners Summary: Nick Duerden sets out to discover what it is like to clean houses for a living by talking to migrant workers who service the homes of contemporary Lon …
Writers need PEN more than ever In 1921, the writer and activist Catherine Amy Dawson Scott founded PEN in London, to bring writers together and provide a space in which they might s …
Kate Summerscale's 'true ghost story' leads Baillie Gifford prize shortlist Former winner Kate Summerscale has made the shortlist for the UK’s top prize for nonfiction, the Baillie Gifford award, for her “true ghost story”, Th …
Gorillaz: Song Machine Season One: Strange Timez review –  the poignant sound of social distancing Damon Albarn and Jamie Hewlett’s Gorillaz project has sold tens of millions of albums, spawned No 1 singles, broken America in a way no Britpop band ( …
MPs to examine impact of streaming on future of music industry MPs are to investigate the impact that music streaming is having on artists, record labels and the sustainability of the music industry. The Commons d …
Beabadoobee: 'I want to be that girl I needed when I was 15' On the face of it, Beatrice Laus’s success looks like the plot of a far-fetched movie, the kind of thing knocked together by Netflix in the hope of sn …
Bill Bryson says he's retiring – is he really putting away his pen? Oh Bill! This isn’t the kind of news we need now. The legendary Bill Bryson, purveyor of funny, insightful, warm-hearted books on everything from trav …
Mac Davis obituary Summary: Mac Davis’s name will always be associated with Elvis Presley, since Davis wrote Presley’s dramatic and politically charged 1969 comeback hit In the G …
Clara Iannotta: Earthing review – compelling new music with bells and whistles on ‘String quartet” seems a rather reductive way of describing any of the four utterly compelling works by Clara Iannotta that the Jack Quartet play here …
Demi Lovato has made the most damning protest song of the Trump era How do you solve a problem like Donald? Like Nixon, Reagan and Thatcher before him, President Trump has been a great catalyst for protest in the arts …
The Living Sea of Waking Dreams by Richard Flanagan review – a wrenching response to a devastated world Richard Flanagan has described his eighth novel – a magical realist tale of ecological anguish – as “a rising scream”. The Living Sea of Waking Dreams …
Ian Michael obituary Summary: My friend and former colleague Ian Michael, who has died aged 84, was an academic specialising in medieval Spanish culture and the author of a series …
Peter Pomerantsev's study of 'the war against reality' wins Gordon Burn prize Peter Pomerantsev has won the 2020 Gordon Burn prize with This Is Not Propaganda, a study of fake news that tells “true stories with artistry”. Speaki …
Why should trans people trust non-trans authors to lead the conversation about our identities? Last month, Australian author Craig Silvey released his first book in a decade, Honeybee. It’s about a young person named Victoria, identified through …
Skepta, JME, Julie ... are the Adenugas Britain's most creative family? Skepta, JME, Julie and Jason – the four Adenuga siblings – are laughing as they remember building a go-kart as kids, raiding the factory next door for …
Peter Frampton: 'I was kept high. If I needed cocaine, he made sure I had it' Peter Frampton recalls with stinging clarity the moment in 1976 when he realized his career was about to take a perilous turn. “I realized that instea …
Islands of Mercy by Rose Tremain review – a globe-trotting adventure The central figure of Rose Tremain’s new novel is Jane Adeane, a young woman of towering height who is convinced that one day “she and her magnificent …
Autechre: Sign review – electronic masters soar and fall in negative space As the devastating and the downright uncanny both become normalised, few things still have the power to surprise in 2020. That said, few would have ex …
Curtis Sittenfeld: 'Alice Munro expanded my sense of what’s possible' Summary: The book I am currently reading What It Means When a Man Falls from the Sky by Lesley Nneka Arimah, a short-story collection that’s just so deft and k …
Carla Bruni's teenage obsessions: 'Francis Bacon shows our confusion, desire, madness' The Clash As a teenager in Paris all I wanted was travel, freedom and independence. I started working [in modelling] right after my high school exam a …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 16-23 October Weekend recitals at Snape Steven Osborne plays Rachmaninov, Alina Ibragimova performs an all-Bach programme for solo violin, and there’s Bach French S …
The best recent science fiction and fantasy – review roundup Summary: Polish fabulist Andrzej Sapkowski, author of the bestselling Witcher series of epic fantasies now filmed for Netflix, begins a new trilogy with The To …
Her dork materials: how Sasha Sloan turned Reddit into songwriting glory Summary: Singer-songwriter Sasha Sloan has a confession to make. “I don’t really listen to music,” she says on the phone from Nashville. “I just listen to stan …
Michael Rosen to publish book about his near-fatal Covid-19 ordeal After spending 47 days in intensive care fighting coronavirus, Michael Rosen is bringing out a book about his experiences with the illness, from the d …
Is David Nicholls's TV adaptation of Us better than his novel? I was crying too hard to compare them Summary: I read Us by David Nicholls in 2014. I’d pre-ordered the hardback, and when it came through my door, I read it through tears in maybe two sittings. Ev …
Maggie O'Farrell: 'I wrote at least 17 separate drafts of After You'd Gone' The short answer as to how I wrote my first novel would be: haphazardly. I was 22 and travelling back overland from Hong Kong, where I’d been living, …
The Divine Comedy review – reassuringly civilised “Hey!” ejaculates the Divine Comedy’s Neil Hannon, waving his hands, “it’s … a gig!” We all know how he feels; personally, it’s my first time back in …
Vincent Peirani and Emile Parisien: Abrazo review – delightful and astonishing The soprano saxophone has a sound that can switch in an instant from light and airy to bleak and lonely. The accordion is so full of potential sounds …
Michiko Kakutani: 'It is more rewarding to debate than hit delete' Michiko Kakutani was chief book reviewer of the New York Times from 1983 to 2017, during which time she won a Pulitzer prize for criticism. In 2018, s …
Thirty books to help us understand the world in 2020 Michael E Mann on the environment A distinguished climatologist and geophysicist, Michael Mann is director of the Earth System Science Center at Penns …
A Sound Mind by Paul Morley review – a musical odyssey A few years ago, on a plane to Barcelona, with a trio of string quartets by Beethoven, Brahms and Hindemith for company, Paul Morley found himself mus …
Beabadoobee: Fake It Flowers review – shiny, vulnerable retro pop London bedroom pop sensation Bea Kristi – aka Beabadoobee – takes her cues from the off-kilter indie guitars of a quarter-century ago, in much the sam …
Detective who busted John and Yoko lifts the lid on corrupt 1960s policing Summary: He was the detective who busted John Lennon, George Harrison and Dusty Springfield, the officer who was told by an Old Bailey judge that he had “poiso …
Don DeLillo: 'I wondered what would happen if power failed everywhere' Over the course of 17 novels, Don DeLillo’s fans have come to feel that he is able to tune into vibrations far beyond the perceptions of other writers …
In brief: War: How Conflict Shaped Us; What Are You Going Through; Shadowplay – reviews War: How Conflict Shaped Us Margaret MacMillan Profile, £20, pp320 In historian Margaret MacMillan’s mind, war, to channel Edwin Starr, is good for, w …
The secret world of diary hunters Sally MacNamara has long told her four children that if there’s a fire in her Seattle home, they should rescue Olga first. Olga isn’t the youngest fam …
4/4 review – a powerhouse of a programme from the Royal Opera The Royal Opera opened its doors to its first post-lockdown live audience for 4/4, a quartet of staged vocal works, none of them originally intended f …
Dorian Electra: My Agenda review – frenetic, pummelling protest-pop Over the last few years pop songs have shortened, curtailed by the whims of streaming services and algorithms. It’s a trend that gender-fluid alt-pop …
Sigur Rós criticise 'unjust' second trial for Icelandic tax evasion Summary: The Icelandic post-rock band Sigur Rós have claimed they face financial ruin or even jail following an “unjust and draconian” second prosecution for t …
Azadi by Arundhati Roy review – at her passionate best Arundhati Roy’s literary career has been one of a kind. Thrust into the limelight of the global publishing industry back in 1997 when her debut novel, …
The streaming startups trying to save the music industry mid-pandemic Two decades ago, digital technology pulled the record business inside out, a shock from which it has only recently recovered. But in 2020 it is helpin …
Love by Roddy Doyle review – boozy old pals find a twist in the tale Alcohol slooshes through Roddy Doyle’s writing, acting as siren, muse and retro marker of masculinity. All the same, the pint tally in his latest nove …
Poem of the week: It Was As If a Ladder by Jane Hirshfield It Was As If a Ladder It was as if a ladder, and each rung, real to itself, round or slat, narrow or wide, rope or metal – and as you ascended, real t …
Acid, nudity and sci-fi nightmares: why Hawkwind were the radicals of 1970s rock Early evening, 13 July 1972, and something strange and rather wonderful is about to happen. On the previous edition of Top of the Pops, David Bowie ha …
Not the Booker prize: vote now for the 2020 winner It’s voting time in the 2020 Not the Booker prize. There are six books in contention: Hashim & Family by Shahnaz Ahsan Underdogs: Tooth and Nail by Ch …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. First, a report from lazalex, who has written in j …
Controversial plans to develop James Joyce house into hostel approved Dublin city council has greenlit a controversial plan to convert the house made famous by James Joyce’s story The Dead into a hostel, with a campaign …
Elisabeth Russell Taylor obituary The writer Elisabeth Russell Taylor, who has died aged 90, leaves a body of work that is at once brilliant, dark and unsettling. In six novels, two of …
Trio by William Boyd review – lights, camera, chaos WH Auden said of TS Eliot that three different figures coexisted within him: a conscientious churchwarden, a screaming peasant woman and a mischievous …
Linda Ronstadt: 'I had to sing those songs or I was going to die' From the start of her career, Linda Ronstadt has talked to the media about her Mexican heritage. “Back in 1967, Tiger Beat magazine asked me what my a …
Picture books for children – reviews As winter looms and the pandemic drags on, children’s publishers are bringing out their big players to keep spirits lifted, from Julia Donaldson and L …
José Padilla, Ibiza DJ who defined chillout music, dies aged 64 José Padilla, the Spanish DJ who helped define chillout music in the 1990s, has died aged 64 from colon cancer. An update on his Facebook page reads: …
Love Island's Ovie Soko: 'It takes guts to live by your internal compass' Months before Ovie Soko applied to be a contestant on hit reality show Love Island, he set himself a goal. “I’m a huge believer in manifesting stuff. …
Gulf royal accused of sexual assault must go, says Hay literature festival Hay literature festival will not return to Abu Dhabi until a senior Gulf royal is removed from his post as the United Arab Emirates’ minister of toler …
A Brief History of Seven Killings: unwieldy, occasionally tedious – and magnificent Marlon James says that when he was writing A Brief History of Seven Killings, he wanted it to be “a novel that would be driven only by voice”. The boo …
Mirwais on producing Madonna: 'I'm not comparing her to a bull but –' Mirwais Ahmadzaï is trying to sum up his frequent collaborator Madonna. “You know bullfighting?” he begins ominously. “It works because the bull is so …
Spencer Davis, bandleader with the Spencer Davis Group, dies aged 81 Summary: Spencer Davis, who as bandleader with the Spencer Davis Group topped the UK charts twice in the mid-60s, has died aged 81 while being treated for pneu …
Charlie Ainley obituary Summary: My father, Charlie Ainley, who has died aged 72, was a singer-songwriter who achieved success in the 1970s with his band Charlie and the Wideboys. The …
Ghosts by Dolly Alderton review – a sharp-eyed debut Quick-witted Nina Dean, the heroine of journalist Dolly Alderton’s debut novel, is a likable food writer who lives in north London. The challenges she …
'This would have changed my career': music industry finally acts on artist mental health Summary: In 2016, Lauren Aquilina released her first album. The same day, she left the music industry, vowing never to return. The pressures of burgeoning fame …
Pianist Keith Jarrett unlikely to perform again after two strokes Keith Jarrett, the jazz and classical musician whose album The Köln Concert is one of the best-selling piano recordings in history, has announced that …
Paul McCartney to release new album recorded alone in lockdown Paul McCartney is to release a new album made entirely alone during lockdown. McCartney III comes out on 11 December and will become the third in a lo …
Don McLean on the tragedy behind American Pie: 'I cried for two years' When Don McLean was 15 years old, he had a premonition that his father was going to die. Distraught, he ran to tell his grandmother. “Don’t be ridicul …
We're all in tiers: the meaning behind the latest Covid-19 buzzword What tier are you in? Since the prime minister announced that regions and cities would be placed in different “tiers” of Covid-19 restrictions, everyo …
The Silence by Don DeLillo review – the machine stops At some point in the editorial process, a rogue line crept into The Silence. The sentence was about airports, masks and Covid-19, and it all seemed th …
Bruce Springsteen: Letter to You review – his most Springsteen-esque album Bruce Springsteen’s 20th studio album reconvenes his most celebrated backing musicians, the E Street Band: ignoring 2014’s stopgap collection of cover …
Unquiet spirits: the lost female ghost-story writers returning to haunt us Summary: As we drift into the season of mists, many of us may cosy up with a ghost story or two. But who are the best known authors behind the classics, who pl …
Adele – every song ranked! 40. Now and Then (2008) Released on the flipside of 2008 single Cold Shoulder, Now and Then really sounds like a B-side. A gently wistful two-chord ac …
Bruckner: Symphonies Nos 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9 review – glorious performances make a worthy tribute Mariss Jansons died last November. During the final 15 years of his life he was the chief conductor of two of the world’s greatest orchestras, the Roy …
I wrote a memoir about abuse. That doesn't mean you're entitled to every detail In the weeks since the launch of my memoir on grief and abuse, No Matter Our Wreckage, I have been asking myself a lot of questions. Questions such as …
Our Shadows by Gail Jones review – a quiet rejection of conformity in the Kalgoorlie mines Gail Jones is a thoughtful, accomplished writer whose work speaks for itself: she has been recognised internationally and within Australia on all of t …
Exit Management by Naomi Booth review – how to survive in London Londoner Callum is struggling to stay afloat both mentally and financially. While his brother has left home and started a family, Callum still lives i …
'It was like we'd gatecrashed someone else's party': how Britpop stars Menswear came apart at the seams Menswear are regaling me with tales from when they were the hottest new band in Britain. It was autumn 1994. Blur and Oasis had gone supernova and the …
Tenderlonious/Jaubi: Ragas from Lahore review – ancient source powers a jazz explorer Summary: Ever since the likes of John Coltrane, Yusef Lateef and Don Cherry came upon the tantric mantras of India and the harmonic and rhythmic forms of India …
Ela Minus: Acts of Rebellion review – techno-pop for dancing, thinking and resisting As acts of rebellion go, Ela Minus’s is an intimate yet powerful one. On her debut album, the Colombia-born, Brooklyn-based artist makes personal-is-p …
The Artful Dickens by John Mullan review – how did he do it? Summary: Charles Dickens was a mesmerist, illusionist and master of sleight of hand. In private he performed conjuring tricks, such as pouring dried fruit, egg …
Tracks of the week reviewed: King Princess, Aya Nakamura, Little Mix King Princess Only Time Makes It Human When Mikaela Straus first appeared, it was hard to shake the sense that her music didn’t live up to her supreme …
The best recent crime and thrillers – review roundup Booker-winning novelist John Banville has ditched nom de crime Benjamin Black for his latest whodunnit, Snow (Faber, £14.99), and replaced his series …
Library ebook lending surges as UK turns to fiction during lockdown They may have been closed for months during lockdown, but amid long days and many on furlough it has emerged that the nation turned to local libraries …
Rapper SL: ‘When I was coming up, there was nobody else on my level’ You would be hard-pressed to find someone who raps more clearly than the 19-year-old SL. “If you rap slower, people take you in more, they understand …
The Kanneh-Mason Family review – varied programme gives each sibling a chance to shine At a time when most of us are spending more evenings in our living rooms than we’d ideally choose, here was the chance to pretend we were in someone e …
Confessions of an atheist writer: Charlotte Wood on Catholicism and the 'art instinct' One of my earliest memories is not a memory at all but a sensation, perhaps a kind of hunger: it is the taste of the wooden pew in the small church in …
Let's Do It by Jasper Rees review – Victoria Wood, perfectionist Victoria Wood was an extraordinarily prolific writer and performer, famed for Acorn Antiques for TV and stage, Pat and Margaret, Dinnerladies, Housewi …
The gift of a book can help ease the pain of a lockdown On Friday 16 October, the last day that we could mingle with other households, I met my friend Sophie. We went to the cinema to see The Thing, John Ca …
Trio by William Boyd review – superbly wry and wise Trio is William Boyd’s 16th novel – and that’s before we get on to the dozen or so screenplays for film and television. How does someone produce so mu …
Classical home listening: Ralph Vaughan Williams and a Rossini feast • When one composer, in this case Ralph Vaughan Williams (1872-1958), dedicates a major work to another, our curiosity is piqued: is the gesture one o …
Bruce Springsteen: Letter to You review –  a sledgehammer of succour While Bruce Springsteen was performing Springsteen on Broadway, the stage iteration of his 2016 memoir, his former teenage bandmate, George Theiss, wa …
One to watch: Lous and the Yakuza Gore, the title of Lous and the Yakuza’s debut album, is more philosophy than aesthetic. It represents Marie-Pierra Kakoma’s acceptance that the worst …
Claire Wilcox: 'When I look at clothing, I’m thinking about narratives’ Claire Wilcox thinks she makes for a highly unlikely fashion curator. “It’s a bit embarrassing, really,” she says. “I’m always complaining to friends …
Sun Ra Arkestra: Swirling review – out of this world Summary: For much of his long, prolific career, the late Sun Ra (born plain Herman Blount) found his music marginalised. Though rooted in jazz tradition, its a …
Nicole Krauss: 'The idea of manhood is so beleaguered' Nicole Krauss is the author of four novels, including the bestselling The History of Love. She was brought up in the splendid isolation of a Bauhaus m …
From the archive: Adam Ant stands and delivers, 1982 Maureen Cleave interviewed the man of the moment in the world of pop for the Observer Magazine of 10 January 1982 (‘The Ant Phenomenon’). ‘Adam Ant,’ …
Bail out our musicians or risk losing them for ever, say classical music stars Summary: Leading figures in classical music say many highly-trained orchestral musicians are giving up on music as they face homelessness and hunger this autum …
Anatomy of a Killing by Ian Cobain review – a death that casts new light on the Troubles In certain parts of Northern Ireland in the late 1970s, a stranger arriving at the door could provoke panic, even terror. The town of Lisburn, near Be …
'Lost' letters reveal JM Barrie and Robert Louis Stevenson's mutual affection Summary: They are two of the greatest writers in history and they were also the greatest of friends. But they never met, and the importance and intensity of th …
John Gray: 'What can we learn from cats? Don't live in an imagined future' What’s it like to be a cat? John Gray has spent a lifetime half-wondering. The philosopher – to his many fans the intellectual cat’s pyjamas, to his c …
Gorillaz: Song Machine Season One: Strange Timez review – playful and potent collaboration The Now Now (2018) was one of those Gorillaz albums that dispensed with the hip hop-led collaborations that have often defined this band of ink and fl …
Swing out, sisters: the nuns singing through lockdown Social distancing and lockdown come naturally to the Poor Clares of Arundel in West Sussex: after all, they’ve been doing it for 800 years. “In our da …
On Connection by Kae Tempest review – persuasive and profound Kae Tempest has added one more string to an already crowded bow: On Connection is the first nonfiction work by this Mercury prize-winning musician, Te …
Billie Eilish review – immersive adventure with fish and spiders Of all the online attempts to fill the gaping chasm where live music used to be before coronavirus, Billie Eilish’s livestream has attracted the most …
In brief: Solo; The Forger's Daughter; Little Weirds – reviews Solo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind) Rebecca Seal Souvenir, £14.99, pp304 Could there be a more apt moment for a book about working on you …
Royal Northern Sinfonia/Cottis – buoyant return with Mozart and an intriguing rarity The autumn season has started late for the Royal Northern Sinfonia – as it has for almost every British orchestra. But this weekend it embarked on an …
Girlhood: Girlhood review – breezy, 90s-tinged electropop Singer-songwriter Tessa Cavanna and producer Christian Pinchbeck first crossed paths in 2017. He heard her singing, so the story goes, when she walked …
From Moomins to murder mysteries: the best books on life outdoors This year we’ve all been spending more time outside – camping, walking or chatting at a safe distance over the garden wall. But when the days grow sho …
Time's Monster by Priya Satia review – living in the past In his celebrated “Letter from Birmingham jail”, written in 1963 while in prison for having taken part in a banned march against segregation, Martin L …
Mr Wilder & Me by Jonathan Coe review – satisfyingly sweeping Summary: The renaissance of Jonathan Coe has been one of the more cheering literary stories of recent years. He’s a writer whose career can be usefully arrange …
Poem of the week: Secrecy by Samuel Greenberg Secrecy The apparent gale, vaned in winding storms Has filled the air with hail and mystic frost The peaceful alley through bowing elms revealed Pregn …
Hay festival founder suspended after bullying allegations Peter Florence, the founder and director of the Hay festival, has been suspended from his position after allegations of bullying from a staff member. …
Rick Riordan: 'I feel very protective of my fans. I am aware of my responsibility to make them feel safe' Summary: After Percy Jackson, Rick Riordan had a plan. Once he’d finished The Tower of Nero, the final novel in his hugely popular 15-book arc about demigod te …
Tips, links and suggestions: what are you reading this week? Summary: Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from the last week. To start, jediperson has been reading the Hallowee …
Jill Paton Walsh obituary Summary: Jill Paton Walsh, who has died aged 83, was for many years best known as a children’s author, before also taking up writing for adults, most successfu …
Oneohtrix Point Never: the warped genius behind Uncut Gems's spine-chilling score It has been a peculiar 2020 for many of us, but Daniel Lopatin’s has been odder than most. In January, the warped electronica that he makes under his …
The Silence by Don DeLillo review – Beckett for the Facebook age It’s not coincidental, I think, that two major novelists have published books this year in which Albert Einstein plays a prominent role. In Ali Smith’ …
Lyric Solitude review – imaginative and immaculate English Touring Opera was one of the British companies that reacted most quickly to the constraints of performing during Covid, and to rethink its aut …
Jerry Jeff Walker: the 'outlaw' songwriter who gave Mr Bojangles to the world Mr Bojangles become a standard as soon as it was first recorded in 1968. Nina Simone did a beautiful version. Bob Dylan did a dreadful version. Sammy …
What literary classics have you read during lockdown? Being at home has led UK readers to tackle some of the classic ultra-long novels like Don Quixote and War and Peace, with sales of the latter seeing a …
Have you been using the pandemic to catch up on long classic novels? What have people been doing to pass all these extra hours at home? Burying ourselves in ultra-long novels such as War and Peace and Don Quixote, appar …
The end of A Brief History of Seven Killings – and our reading group Summary: The final line of Marlon James’s A Brief History of Seven Killings is: “–Kimmy?” It may not be “So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back c …
Shut Up and Dance: the Hackney rap duo who raved against racism In British dance music history, the likes of Shoom, Spectrum and the Haçienda are often held up as the defining clubs from the scene’s formative years …
The Apparition Phase by Will Maclean review – unleashing ghosts Tim and Abi Smith are teenage twins growing up in a lower middle-class household in the early 1970s. They are obsessed with ghosts, but also with “sta …
Elgar: where to start with his music If Britain has a national composer, it is Edward Elgar (1857-1934). His music is often seen as epitomising the smug Victorian world into which he was …
Top 10 horror novels As much as horror is a genre it’s also a technique; a way to confront or explore something real by taking the audience to extremes. As a kid I was ter …
Wole Soyinka to publish first novel in almost 50 years Wole Soyinka has used his time in lockdown to write his first novel in almost 50 years. The Nigerian playwright and poet, who became the first African …
Christiane Eda-Pierre obituary Summary: The soprano Christiane Eda-Pierre, who has died aged 88, was one of the first black opera singers to achieve an international reputation. A native of …
UK music industry study: diversity increase stalls at senior levels The senior levels of the UK music industry remain stubbornly white and male, with Black, Asian and minority ethnic employees making up only 19.9% of e …
The Interest by Michael Taylor review – busting the British slavery myth Britain’s national myth about slavery goes something like this: for most of history, slavery was a normal state of affairs; but in the later 18th cent …
Look Again by David Bailey review – no reflection, no regret “I think photography is all sex,” writes David Bailey. “That’s what happens when you’re close to somebody – you end up in bed with them.” He should kn …
'Who is Jamie Webster?': the Liverpool hero who topped the first folk chart Jamie Webster is recalling the moment he became the first artist to top the newly created Official Folk Album Chart with his debut LP, We Get By. “I w …
French bookshops ask to be treated as essential services during new lockdown French authors, booksellers and publishers are imploring the French government to allow bookshops to stay open because reading is “essential”, as the …
Matt Furie on life after Pepe the Frog: 'You have to lead by example' Matt Furie – a superhumanly gentle person, imagine Bob Ross with a skateboard – never wanted to be in the political limelight. When we last spoke in 2 …
Midnight Oil: The Makarrata Project review – a chorus of anger over stolen land This mini-album, this “project”, may be the first new music from Midnight Oil in some two decades, but its genesis goes back almost two decades more, …
'There's something to scream about': Bring Me the Horizon's pandemic political awakening In 2019, Oli Sykes foretold “some fuckin’ mental disaster in a couple of years … We’re literally at the end, doesn’t it feel like that to you?” He ima …
No, Covid-19 isn't a 'plandemic' Have you been taken in by the “plandemic”? This pun encapsulates the suspicious notion that Covid-19 was not a natural accident but was deliberately l …
The First Woman by Jennifer Nansubuga Makumbi review – coming of age in Uganda Kirabo is an inquisitive child. She has even more unanswered questions than other girls in the run-up to puberty, the greatest and most mysterious of …
M Huncho and Nafe Smallz: DNA review – dextrous chemistry deflated by familiar lyrical concerns M Huncho and Nafe Smallz have spent the last couple of years traversing the British rap scene as solo artists, scoring starry collaborations with the …
Klopp: My Liverpool Romance by Anthony Quinn review – a sporting love letter You don’t have to be born in Liverpool to support Liverpool FC. The brand is global, the owners are American, the fans are as likely to come from Bena …
Philharmonia/Rouvali review – bold programme that sparkled Nothing says “classical music in 2020” like a shrunken symphony orchestra scattered across a huge stage, silently rising to its feet as its conductor …
Caleb Femi: 'Henceforth I’m solely preoccupied with being a merchant of joy' Every Monday when Caleb Femi was a young boy in the 1990s, the walkways in the housing estate where he lived with his parents and four siblings were s …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Middle Kids, Maxïmo Park, Lana Del Rey Summary: Middle Kids R U 4 Me? Even before the reign of TUT (These Unprecedented Times) it would have been mighty difficult to resist a song that opens with th …
The return of McFly: will the cheeky pop-punkers finally get their due? The year is 2005, combat trousers inexplicably have tassels and chart music is groaning under the weight of reality TV winners and Crazy Frog. Tweens …
Writers protest after minister suggests anti-racism books support segregation More than 100 leading black writers including Bernardine Evaristo, Malorie Blackman and Benjamin Zephaniah have condemned recent comments made by equa …
‘I spooked myself right before bedtime’: authors on their scariest creations Summary: Neil Gaiman: ‘It took a while for me to persuade people Coraline really was children’s fiction’ I’ve created an awful lot of things. Some would point …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 1-7 November The Magic Flute Glyndebourne Touring Opera’s cut-down, semi-staged performances of Mozart’s Singspiel, directed by Donna Stirrup and sung in English. …
CPS will not prosecute UAE minister accused of sexually assaulting Briton The Crown Prosecution Service has declined to prosecute a United Arab Emirates senior royal accused of sexually assaulting a British woman working wit …
Behind closed doors: does love and isolation make Bartók’s Bluebeard the opera for our times? We all know Bluebeard. From Jane Eyre to Kubrick’s The Shining, his castle has become shorthand for a place where dark secrets lurk behind locked door …
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie's new short story is what I've been waiting for I’ll take pretty much anything from Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie. Her words, even her tweets, somehow flow in a way that is so lyrical, light and playful …
Children’s books roundup – the best new picture books and novels This month there’s an emphasis on change and transition, loss and hopefulness. In picture books, Nicola Davies’s Last (Tiny Owl) is inspired by the tr …
The Godfather: how the Mafia blockbuster became a political handbook Mario Puzo’s The Godfather now functions the way fairytales or Bible stories do. It’s become a fundamental narrative deeply embedded in the collective …
Classical home listening: a good week for Bruckner fans • Bruckner struggled with his last completed symphony, the almighty Eighth, reworking initial efforts and leaving posterity to debate – fervently in s …
Billie Eilish: Where Do We Go?: the Livestream review – feel the fear… This is no gig for arachnophobes. Just as physical gigs used to warn people about strobe lights, Billie Eilish’s debut live stream might have included …
One to watch: GeeJay Summary: GeeJay have a humble origin story. Vocalist Gina Jane and producer, pianist and saxophonist Jacob Lobo formed the band while working together as baris …
Judith and Dave O'Higgins: His ’n’ Hers review – duelling saxes Summary: How do they do it, those rare individuals who combine playing music at the highest level with another, totally different and demanding occupation? In …
'The jukebox, the soda fountain, the mosaic floors': Andrew Pippos on the Greek Australian cafe Most of the old Greek diners have now disappeared from Australia – but last century, they provided glamour and delicious food to dusty and desolate ou …
Helen Garner: ‘Is there hope for women and men?’ 1987 “What do you write in your diary?” “Everything. I try to write all the worst things. That’s the hardest. The temptation to gloss it up. I force m …
Klopp: My Liverpool Romance by Anthony Quinn review – a win-win The Occam’s razor explanation as to why this slight and snappy paean to Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp works: Anthony Quinn is a delightful writer wri …
Hungry by Grace Dent review – a delicious tribute Summary: Hungry is a story about food, class and families and the distance travelled between a terraced house in Carlisle and multimillion-pound London restaur …
Sam Smith: Love Goes review – longing to let loose Summary: Same as it ever was, heartbreak is bread and butter for the modern multimillion-selling pop star. Where Sam Smith’s last album plumbed the depths of a …
Ornella Volta obituary Ornella Volta, who has died aged 93, was the founder and creator of the Fondation Erik Satie and the Erik Satie Archive, a wonderful collection assemb …
Anita Mason obituary My friend Anita Mason, who has died aged 78, was the author of eight novels, one of which, The Illusionist, made it on to the 1983 Booker shortlist. A …
Justin Connolly obituary Summary: My former composition teacher and friend, Justin Connolly, who has died aged 87, was a leading light of modernist music in Britain in the 1960s and 70 …
How one man escaped the Holocaust and saved his family by performing as a clown As a child, Ralph Horowitz’s grandfather often lulled him to sleep with bedtime stories about the brave clowns who escaped the big, bad Nazis. It was …
Black-owned bookshops call for more diversity in UK publishing Black-owned bookshops in the UK are calling for better representation of black authors in the long-term after reporting a surge in interest following …
NaNoWriMo: how to make best use of the annual writing month If everyone has a book in them, then November is the month that many of those books are conceived. NaNoWriMo, or National Novel Writing Month, comes o …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup The House Tom Watson and Imogen Robertson Sphere, £18.99, pp384 In former Labour party deputy leader Tom Watson’s debut thriller, The House, it is 202 …
In brief: The Black Book; Jeeves and the Leap of Faith; Tender Is the Flesh The Black Book Sybil Oldfield Profile, £25, 437pp “My dear, the people that we should have been seen dead with!” Nöel Coward’s quip to Rebecca West wa …
Poem of the week: from The Wanderer by Christopher Brennan From The Wanderer The land I came thro’ last was dumb with night, a limbo of defeated glory, a ghost: for wreck of constellations flicker’d perishing …
Silver Sun's James Broad brought a dazzling new side to Britpop It’s a cruel quirk of artistry that praise is often at its most fervent when the artist is no longer around to hear it. When news broke of Silver Sun …
Pixies: how we made Where Is My Mind? Summary: Black Francis, songwriter The song is about a high-school trip to the Bahamas. I was swimming in clear water and there was a small fish – about four i …
Guardian Australia book club: join Helen Garner to talk about writing, life, and releasing her diaries Early in One Day I’ll Remember This, the second volume of Helen Garner’s collected diaries, one of the entries reads as follows: “V quotes Degas quoti …
Not a Novel by Jenny Erpenbeck – refreshingly frank and incisive When the Berlin Wall fell, German author Jenny Erpenbeck was oblivious. In her essay Homesick for Sadness, she tells us: “I literally slept through th …
Lady Gaga attacks Trump's 'grab' remarks at Joe Biden rally Lady Gaga gave an impassioned message of support for Joe Biden as America heads to the polls, making reference to Donald Trump’s history of crude sexu …
The Dead Are Arising by Les Payne and Tamara Payne review – the radical ascent of Malcolm X “If you’re black you were born in jail,” said Malcolm X in 1964, the year before his assassination. The American dream was a nightmare as far as the b …
Grammy awards rename world music category to avoid 'connotations of colonialism' The Grammys are changing the name of their “best world music” album category to “best global music” album, to avoid “connotations of colonialism”. In …
Neurodivergent author Camilla Pang’s Explaining Humans wins Royal Society prize Dr Camilla Pang, whose debut uses science to explore the complexities of human behaviour through the prism of her autism spectrum disorder, has won th …
'We were lucky people didn't throw tomatoes': Klaus Voormann on his Beatles and Plastic Ono days In September 1969, the bass player and artist Klaus Voormann, who had recently left Manfred Mann, received a phone call from John Lennon. There was no …
Scoff by Pen Vogler review – food and class in Britain Summary: During peak lockdown you couldn’t move for stories about furloughed professionals filling their empty days with heroic bouts of home baking. Deliveroo …
Earthlings by Sayaka Murata review – a fizzing tale of alienation Sayaka Murata’s new novel takes the quietly spoken themes of her cult hit Convenience Store Woman and sends them into orbit. The two books might be se …
'Fill the room with love': the stress-busting jazz of Alabaster dePlume Uncertainty has been the only constant of this strange year. For Gus Fairbairn, AKA multi-instrumentalist Alabaster dePlume, the anxiety bred by that …
Handel: where to start with his music A German composer who brought Italian musical fashions to a London audience, George Frideric Handel (1685-1759) is the baroque era’s theatre composer …
African Europeans by Olivette Otele review – when race mattered less Summary: Among the private drawings of the great Renaissance artist Albrecht Dürer are two moving likenesses of African Europeans – so vivid and timeless you h …
Top 10 books about books I find books within books a uniquely interesting subject – what better place to explore literature than within literature? Not to be pretentious, but …
Universal credit has received an 'uplift' – isn't that just an 'increase'? Summary: When first asked to extend free school meals over the holidays, the British government pointed to its “uplift” to universal credit of £20 per week. Th …
Mr Wilder & Me by Jonathan Coe review – the director's cut Jonathan Coe is not a cinematic novelist in the sense that the description is generally meant – dialogue-heavy scenes in camera-ready settings – but m …
Bookshop.org is what the publishing world has been waiting for In publishing we often talk about things that we are “excited” and “delighted” about, so much that sometimes I think the words have lost their meaning …
The best recent poetry – review roundup Summary: It’s rare for a book of poems to repeatedly leave you breathless when reading it. Such is the urgent brilliance of Caleb Femi’s Poor (Penguin, £9.99). …
Solitude, sunshine and sanctuary in The Secret Garden Summary: If the last time you encountered Frances Hodgson Burnett’s The Secret Garden was in childhood, you probably think of Mary, a sour little girl, waking …
Little Mix: Confetti review – still stuck inside the pop factory In 2018, a few days before the release of Little Mix’s last album, the quartet announced their split from Simon Cowell’s Syco company, which had sheph …
Ken Hensley, songwriter with 70s rock band Uriah Heep, dies aged 75 Ken Hensley, the songwriter and multi-instrumentalist best known for his work with 70s rock band Uriah Heep, has died aged 75. His press representativ …
Neil Young – every album ranked! 45. Landing on Water (1986) If other 1970s greats, including Don Henley, were having 80s hits with modern, synth-heavy records then why shouldn’t Neil …
Vanitas: Lieder by Schubert, Beethoven and Rihm review – songs in the key of life The Austrian baritone Georg Nigl’s disc with pianist Olga Pashchenko mostly replicates a recital the pair gave at the Berlin festival in September las …
The Glamour Boys by Chris Bryant review – the rebels who fought for Britain In The Glamour Boys, Chris Bryant sets out to bring to light the remarkable and in some cases heroic contribution of gay MPs to Britain’s involvement …
From Supalonely to stadiums: meet Benee, a 'normal idiot from New Zealand' Twelve thousand fans packed into a venue on a Saturday night, phones aloft, no masks in sight: it looks like a scene from another era, not October 202 …
From Weezer to Missy Elliott: 10 of the best difficult second albums Second Coming (1994) The Stone Roses Released five years after the Madchester pioneers’ era-defining debut, Second Coming has become synonymous with d …
Dutchavelli: Dutch from the 5th review – drill trailblazer gets deep 2020 is going Dutch. The east London drill rapper – and brother of Stefflon Don – assisted Tion Wayne and Stormzy to make I Dunno a contender for UK r …
'It had been on my shelf for years': readers share their lockdown reads Martin Chuzzlewit by Charles Dickens Adrian Tilley, 73, retired English teacher, Okehampton, Devon It had been lurking in the bookcase for too long. I …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Reyna, Ariana Grande, Finneas Reyna 7’11 A woozy, groovy little number from the Milwaukee sister duo – kind of Charli XCX meets Saint Etienne – with a Spanish chorus that will make …
Rumaan Alam: ‘What we are experiencing now is part of a bigger moment’ When the end of the world arrives in Leave the World Behind, Rumaan Alam’s third novel, it comes not with a bang or a whimper, but a mysterious sound. …
Erin Wall obituary The Canadian-American soprano Erin Wall, who has died aged 44 of complications resulting from metastatic breast cancer, was highly regarded for her he …
Singer, activist, sex machine, addict: the troubled brilliance of Billie Holiday There’s an electrifying moment in Billie, a new documentary about Billie Holiday, when Jonathan “Jo” Jones, a tempestuous, influential African America …
Cottage industry: the enduring power of the ‘cabin in the woods’ album For some, the “cabin in the woods” album aesthetic reached critical mass in 2011, with a headline in the Onion: “Man Just Going To Grab Guitar And Old …
Hundreds of authors join signing initiative to support local bookshops Summary: Matt Haig, Malorie Blackman and Adam Kay are among hundreds of authors who have come together in a “thunderclap of support” to encourage readers to bu …
Fretwork review – John Paul Jones opens LIFEM with idiosyncratic and effective new work The annual Tudor Pull is one of the quirky traditions that London keeps yielding up if you look for them. Every year – except 2020, of course – the Qu …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 6-13 November BBC Symphony Orchestra/Oramo The BBCSO’s first live concert of the autumn at the Barbican includes the world premiere of a chamber-orchestra arrangeme …
Cliff Richard becomes first artist to reach UK Top 5 across eight decades Cliff Richard has become the first artist to reach the Top 5 of the UK album chart across eight consecutive decades. His new album Music … The Air Tha …
Lime Cordiale, Le Pie, The Whitlams and more: Australia's best new music for November The Whitlams – Ballad of Bertie Kidd For fans of: Tim Freedman, Randy Newman, Don Walker The Whitlams’ first single in 14 years finds Tim Freedman in …
Helen Garner: 'Feminism came like a bombshell into my life' How does it feel to be Helen Garner, one of Australia’s most respected authors, having published not one but two volumes of her very personal diaries? …
What Are You Going Through by Sigrid Nunez review – questions of survival Summary: American author Sigrid Nunez had been somewhat overlooked before her seventh novel, The Friend, won the 2018 National Book award. Like its predecessor …
Writing a novel is an arduous and solitary process – that's why I need music Summary: Whenever I am asked how I write, my answer is always: “with grime or UK rap playing as loud as possible in my ears”. When I finally sent my second nov …
Val McDermid: 'The Mermaids Singing felt like a narrative emergency' Summary: By 1994, I’d published seven crime novels and I’d been writing full-time for three years. The first two years, my writing had been a tax loss. I’d onl …
Classical home listening: John Tavener: No Longer Mourn for Me; Josquin Masses and more • At once tough and inspiring, the cellist Steven Isserlis’s tribute to John Tavener, No Longer Mourn for Me (Hyperion), combines various musical forc …
Opera Triple Bill: Wolf-Ferrari, Mascagni, Donizetti review – sex, violence and serious talent Three one-act operas, three women: one who beats up her docile husband; one a prostitute who dreams of unsullied love; one whose secret, how bad can i …
Tunng: Tunng Presents… Dead Club review – a thoughtful meditation on life and loss A concept album about death and grief during a pandemic? Now there’s bravery. Fortunately, Tunng bring a characteristically light touch to these tende …
Claire Messud: 'To be a writer is to stand at the side' Summary: Claire Messud is the author of seven novels, including the Booker-longlisted The Emperor’s Children and The Burning Girl. She was born in Connecticut, …
Oxford Dictionaries amends 'sexist' definitions of the word 'woman' Oxford University Press has updated its dictionaries’ definitions of the word “woman” following an extensive review triggered by equality campaigners. …
The Moth and the Mountain: A True Story of Love, War and Everest by Ed Caesar - review On 16 April 1934, Maurice Wilson set off from the Rongbuk monastery in Tibet to climb Mount Everest via the North Col, entirely alone. He carried 45lb …
Oh Happy Day by Carmen Callil review – tearful compassion and eloquent rage In the 18th century, the body snatchers who grubbed up coffins and sold exhumed corpses for medical research were ghoulishly nicknamed “resurrection m …
In brief: When the Lights Go Out; The Stubborn Light of Things; Olive, Again – review When the Lights Go Out Carys Bray Hutchinson, £14.99, pp336 Bray’s third novel examines the disintegration of a marriage against a backdrop of the cli …
Ariana Grande: Positions review – saucy but safe Whether she’s singing about her exes or world-shaking tragedy, or both, Ariana Grande has always been an open-book superstar. But few expected the bal …
Ken Hensley obituary As a teenager Ken Hensley, who has died aged 75, was determined to become a rock star. “Everything I did from the age of 16 onwards was focused entire …
Bones Hillman, Midnight Oil's 'bassist with the beautiful voice', dies aged 62 Midnight Oil’s bassist and backing vocalist Bones Hillman has died at the age of 62. The New Zealand-born Hillman died at his home in Milwaukee on Sat …
Bones Hillman's bass was exemplary but his vocals were intrinsic to Midnight Oil's sound The first time I saw Wayne Stevens – better known by his stage name Bones Hillman – was at the Brisbane Entertainment Centre on 26 September 1987, mak …
Leave the World Behind by Rumaan Alam review – breathtaking and prescient It wasn’t only because I read Rumaan Alam’s stupendously good Leave the World Behind immediately after Don DeLillo’s latest, the rather more meagre Th …
Our Days Are Like Full Years by Harriet Pattison review – moving and heroic Not again,” said the great American architect Louis Kahn, when his lover Harriet Pattison told him she was pregnant. He’d had another lover, Anne Tyng …
Poem of the week: On a Pebbly Beach by John Birtwhistle On a Pebbly Beach When our family was young and the children took off over the stones like little dogs as we followed in our different conversation an …
Pete Baillie obituary My friend Pete Baillie, who has died aged 73 , was a music lover who set up a mid-1980s fanzine called Capital M that covered the London pub rock scen …
'It's the screams of the damned!' The eerie AI world of deepfake music ‘It’s Christmas time! It’s hot tub time!” sings Frank Sinatra. At least, it sounds like him. With an easy swing, cheery bonhomie, and understated bras …
BBCSO/Oramo review – luminous and mesmerising Summary: The 90th birthday of the BBC Symphony Orchestra last month inevitably went the way of many other celebrations this year. BBCSO’s establishment in 1930 …
Joe Biden's love for Seamus Heaney reveals a soul you can trust I didn’t fall for Joe Biden until I learned that he loves the poetry of Seamus Heaney. Anyone who responds to the steady, humane voice of Heaney has t …
Stacey Abrams: Georgia's political heroine … and romance author Stacey Abrams is the former Georgia state house minority leader, whose fierce fight for Georgians’ right to vote has been credited for potentially han …
Mary Wollstonecraft finally honoured with statue after 200 years Summary: It shows a silvery naked everywoman figure emerging free and defiantly from a swirling mingle of female forms and, thanks to a 10-year slog of fundrai …
There Are Places in the World Where Rules Are Less Important Than Kindness by Carlo Rovelli – review We live in a golden age of science writing, where weighty subjects such as quantum mechanics, genetics and cell theory are routinely rendered intellig …
Rapper Junglepussy: ‘I don’t like the narrative that women have to be superheroes’ Summary: Junglepussy has a picture of the original nasty gal, Betty Davis, on her fridge in her Brooklyn apartment. “A lot of people felt the same way about he …
Moms by Yeong-shin Ma review – a joyous celebration Lee Soyeon is a divorced woman in her 50s who works as a cleaner in a Seoul apartment building. Her life isn’t easy. Her bosses are mean, and her thir …
Literary puzzle solved for just third time in almost 100 years Summary: One of the world’s most fiendish literary puzzles – a murder mystery in which all the pages are out of order – has been solved for just the third time …
England's bookshops should be classed as essential, booksellers argue Summary: The Booksellers Association has called on the government to classify bookshops as essential retailers during England’s second lockdown, as other retai …
Joan Armatrading: 'I want to make a heavy metal album – with lots of guitar shredding' ‘It’s very nice to be honoured,” says Joan Armatrading, down the phone from her home in Surrey. The 69-year-old is talking about receiving this year’s …
Missionaries by Phil Klay review – wrenching and wise Summary: Suffering trauma, boredom and shame from covering over-optimistic US military involvements in Afghanistan and Iraq, American reporter Lisette Marigny …
'She made music jump into 3D': Wendy Carlos, the reclusive synth genius Summary: This summer, an 80-year-old synthesiser pioneer suddenly appeared online. She had been silent for 11 years, but now something had appeared that she ju …
Seven Kinds of People You Find in Bookshops by Shaun Bythell review – virtuosic venting There’s a moment in the first season of the short-lived but influential sitcom Black Books in which an elderly customer appears with a box of attracti …
Children's books eight times as likely to feature animal main characters as BAME people Summary: Two years after the stark revelation that only 1% of British children’s books featured a main character who was black, Asian or minority ethnic, the p …
MPs to hold inquiry into ensuring post-pandemic survival of music festivals MPs are to examine how UK music festivals can survive in 2021 after the coronavirus pandemic wiped out a majority of festivals this year, resulting in …
Dvořák: where to start with his music Antonín Dvořák (1841-1904) was a passionate Czech whose music transcended national boundaries and, indeed, crossed the world. A contemporary of Brahms …
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie voted Women's prize 'winner of winners' Summary: Thirteen years after she won the Women’s prize for fiction, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s novel about the Biafran war, Half of a Yellow Sun, has been vot …
I'd planned to have a midlife crisis this year. I hadn't planned on it being shaped by Covid This was meant to be the year of my own private midlife crisis. Instead it has become the year of the novel coronavirus. I’d been anticipating turning …
The Upswing review - can Biden heal America? So the Biden-Harris ticket has won, but by narrow margins in some of the battleground states. How did partisanship reach such a pitch that Donald Trum …
‘A massive game-changer’: how Channel U brought grime to satellite TV If you haven’t heard of Channel U – the defunct UK rap and grime music channel that launched in 2003 in a blaze of anarchic, DIY spirit – it may sound …
The Betrayals by Bridget Collins review – ingenious, overblown fantasy When student Léo Martin first approaches Montverre, an exclusive seat of learning high in the mountains, his path is blocked by a “cobweb ... huge, a …
Pa Salieu: Send Them to Coventry review – on the frontline with the UK's freshest new rapper Summary: This year may well have been the toughest in history for a new artist to break through to mainstream success. It’s not merely the lack of gigs, festiv …
The Lonely Century by Noreena Hertz review – our need for community Even when lockdown is over, there are an awful lot of ways to be lonely, according to the economist Noreena Hertz. You could be the warehouse worker u …
Rapper Octavian denies allegations of verbal, physical and emotional abuse French-British rapper Octavian (AKA Octavian Oliver Godji) has denied allegations of verbal, physical and emotional abuse made by a former partner. In …
Neil Diamond's teenage obsessions: 'The Brooklyn Dodgers betrayed me and broke my heart' Brooklyn Dodgers I was born and raised in Brooklyn, and for me the most important aspect of growing up there was the Dodgers baseball team. Everybody …
A Bag of Bagatelles: Piano Works by Birtwistle and Beethoven review – authority and clarity For the first 40 years of his composing career, Harrison Birtwistle wrote no major works for solo piano. There were a few miniatures, beginning with P …
Life After Truth by Ceridwen Dovey review – lifestyles of the remarkably privileged Ceridwen Dovey has published to acclaim both fiction (Blood Kin, Only the Animals, In the Garden of the Fugitives), and non-fiction (Writers on Writer …
Archie Roach’s Took the Children Away: how one heartbreaking song galvanised a nation Summary: It wasn’t hard to find people who wanted to talk about Archie Roach: everyone approached by the Guardian said yes, and all of them spoke from the hear …
Techno DJ Derrick May accused of sexual assault by four women Summary: Techno DJ and producer Derrick May has been accused of sexual assault by four women, which he denies. In testimonies to DJ Mag, the women, speaking un …
The Weeknd to headline Super Bowl 2021 half-time show The Weeknd has been announced as the headline performer at next year’s Super Bowl. The Grammy award-winning Canadian singer, whose hits include Starbo …
Lucia Cadotsch: Speak Low II review – jazz standards dissolved and recast Lucia Cadotsch’s 2016 debut Speak Low unveiled the young Swiss musician’s unusual proposition, singing the classics with spellbindingly impassive puri …
Kylie, Cher, Robbie Williams and more team up for Children in Need single Summary: Kylie Minogue, Cher, Robbie Williams and more have teamed up for a charity single to benefit Children in Need. The supergroup was assembled by Radio 2 …
New Order frontman Bernard Sumner recovering from coronavirus Summary: New Order frontman Bernard Sumner has said he is recovering from coronavirus. Speaking to Minnesota radio station The Current, he said he caught it th …
On the brink of a Booker: 2020's shortlisted authors on the stories behind their novels Douglas Stuart Shuggie Bain I am a mammy’s boy. I always have been. I never knew my father. My mother was a glamorous, gallus, Catherine-wheel of a wo …
Virginia Woolf statue fundraiser flooded with donations after Wollstonecraft controversy After the controversial unveiling of a naked statue honouring Mary Wollstonecraft this week, plans to erect a public monument to a fully-clothed Virgi …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 13-20 November Mozart’s Requiem The performance that should have marked English National Opera’s return to the Coliseum is now a TV event. Mark Wigglesworth conducts …
Is Joe Biden's win a turning point in a hard year of bad news? I’d describe myself as a realist. In the past, friends have described me as a pessimist, probably because I tend to err on the side of the very worst …
What You Could Have Won by Rachel Genn review – a toxic relationship Summary: We begin with a psychiatrist sitting in a cafe on a Greek island, pondering how he got there: the story involves drugs, a girlfriend as a psychologica …
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie: ‘America under Trump felt like a personal loss' A few hours before Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie and I are due to speak, the result of the US election is finally called. The Nigerian novelist, who is bas …
Otegha Uwagba: 'I’ve spent my entire life treading around white people’s feelings' Otegha Uwagba wants to get some things off her chest. From her home in south London, where she grew up, she tells me that her new short book Whites is …
Classical home listening: two Labyrinths, one Gran Partita and a Requiem Labyrinth David Greilsammer (Naïve) Labyrinth Khatia Buniatishvili (Sony) Mark Simpson: Geysir; Mozart: ‘Gran Partita’, K361 (Orchid Classics) • Two p …
Lawrence Power and Ryan Wigglesworth review – effortless brilliance From the emotional muscularity of Brahms to the spiky mystery of Britten, to the glittering, pinpoint invention of a new work by Ryan Wigglesworth, th …
One to watch: the Lathums In any other year, a band on the up playing a gig at a renowned local landmark would have guaranteed a sell-out crowd and a celebratory atmosphere. Bu …
Dave Brubeck: Lullabies – genial sleepytime jazz Summary: Dave Brubeck is famous for his 1961 megahit Take Five (composed by his saxophonist, Paul Desmond), and catchy numbers in odd time signatures such as B …
James Blunt: ‘My body has not been a temple. I’ve put it through painful experiences’ I was an army brat who lived on army patches – in Cyprus, Hong Kong, Germany and as far afield and exotic as Yorkshire. Every two years we’d move with …
Going for Broke: The Rise of Rishi Sunak by Michael Ashcroft review – too perfect to be plausible The dazzling smile that transforms into a thoughtful gaze when that’s more appropriate. The sleek frame encased in expensive tailoring. The good manne …
Joe Biden: American Dreamer by Evan Osnos review – enter the sympathiser-in-chief Americans have spent this year watching aghast as reality demolished what Evan Osnos calls “the most basic stories we tell ourselves”. Those stories h …
Doctor Who's sonic pioneers to turn internet into giant musical instrument The Radiophonic Workshop has always broken new sonic ground, from the Doctor Who theme to the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. Now they’re at it agai …
(R)evolution by Gary Numan review – electro-pop's heart-on-sleeve godfather In Dylan Jones’s recent oral history of the new romantic movement, Sweet Dreams, Gary Numan stands out like a sore pale thumb. He fell into electronic …
Let's Do It: The Authorised Biography of Victoria Wood by Jasper Rees – review Summary: Victoria Wood was told in 1974 by a talent show judge that she would never be a success. Yet she went on to enjoy a 40-year career as a comedian, writ …
Benee: Hey U X review – endearingly careworn Released at the end of last year, Supalonely – 20-year-old New Zealander Stella Bennett’s breakthrough hit – found a new life via TikTok in March, as …
In brief: Juve!; The Heavens; The Beloved Children – reviews Juve! Herbie Sykes Yellow Jersey, £20, pp416 Herbie Sykes has written several fine books on cycling and Italian culture. This keen Italophile now turn …
Great gags, hope and happy endings: books to cheer everyone up With the second lockdown upon us, we have never been more in need of books to cheer and charm. As both reader and writer, I have waged a lifelong batt …
We Still Have Words review – two fathers come to terms with terror Georges Salines and Azdyne Amimour both lost a child in the Paris attacks of 13 November 2015. Salines’s daughter, Lola, and Amimour’s son, Samy, were …
Scoff by Pen Vogler review – a history book to devour Summary: Long ago, I briefly went out with a man who happened to be both a good cook and an Old Etonian. It was never going to last, but the specific occasion …
Poem of the week: Now that you are not-you by Rosie Garland Now that you are not-you and have satisfied the finger-check of pulse at throat and wrist ear to the chest mirror to the lips and you’re done with the …
Burnt Sugar by Avni Doshi review – a thrilling ride into hell Summary: Burnt Sugar is an extraordinary confection. Avni Doshi’s debut novel has been shortlisted for the 2020 Booker prize and is an elegantly written family …
English National Opera/Wigglesworth review – Mozart's Requiem is urgent and direct In the time of Covid, any concert is an achievement in itself. This performance of Mozart’s Requiem by English National Opera under Mark Wigglesworth …
How we made: Take My Breath Away, the Top Gun theme tune by Berlin Terri Nunn, singer Before I was in Berlin I auditioned for the part of Princes Leia in Star Wars. I was 15 but looked 12. Harrison Ford was over 30 bu …
Billie Eilish to headline Aria awards ceremony Billie Eilish will headline this year’s Aria awards, in a coup for organisers made possible by the new normal of live-streamed events. The singer-song …
Kylie Minogue's appeal has always been in her sparkling transcendence of the ordinary It would have taken a brave soothsayer to predict, back in the 1980s, that Kylie Minogue was on track to become Australia’s most enduring pop icon. Li …
Mike Campbell on life after Tom Petty: 'I think I found my own voice' Heartbreakers’ guitarist Mike Campbell vividly remembers the first time his star bandmate Tom Petty heard a recording of him singing. “‘That’s weird,’ …
Meet Chubby and the Gang, UK punk’s most vital new band “My parents were punks, back in the 70s,” says Charlie Manning Walker, otherwise known as Chubby Charles, the leader of UK punk’s most exciting new ba …
Fiction for older children review – wayward wizards and a war of the worlds Wherever you stand on comedians writing children’s books, some are more worthy than others. Step forward Simon Farnaby, late of the Horrible Histories …
Pharrell Williams announces gender-neutral skincare line The musician and entrepreneur Pharrell Williams has announced the release of Humanrace, his long-awaited skincare line. Significantly, it is gender ne …
Taylor Swift criticises Scooter Braun after $300m masters sale Taylor Swift has criticised music industry mogul Scooter Braun over his sale of her master recordings to a US private equity firm, including the accus …
A Promised Land by Barack Obama review – memoir of a president Summary: To read Barack Obama’s autobiography in the last, snarling days of Donald Trump is to stare into an abyss between two opposite ends of humanity, and w …
Dolly Parton partly funded Moderna Covid vaccine research It’s truly the greatest gift of all: a $1m donation by Dolly Parton to coronavirus vaccine research supported the development of the Moderna vaccine, …
Milkman to Mark Twain: online exhibition celebrates telephones in literature They can be objects of romance or harbingers of doom. They can provide plot twists, shocks, horror, comedy or character. Now the role of the telephone …
'I cried when it was all over': the actor who brought 120 characters to life In the winter of 2009, Nick Sullivan received what would become his most daunting commission. “They sent me this huge cardboard box,” says the actor a …
Dennis Wickens obituary My father, Dennis Wickens, who has died aged 94, was a composer who reached his widest audience after his 80th birthday. It was not until he was singi …
Julia O’Faolain obituary The writing of Julia O’Faolain, who has died aged 88, reflected a cosmopolitan life and impressively well-stocked mind. Her novels are set in France, …
Douglas Matthews obituary My friend Douglas Matthews, who has died aged 93, was a librarian who was regarded by many grateful authors and researchers as the master of all book …
Boris the Menace? Beano to publish first comic for grownups Boris and Dom may have gone their separate ways but their crazy antics live on, and this week they may finally get their comeuppance. Not yet in real …
Little Mix's Jesy Nelson taking time off for 'private medical reasons' Summary: British band Little Mix have announced that Jesy Nelson is taking “extended time off” from the band “for private medical reasons”. The group have aske …
To Be a Man by Nicole Krauss review – how far do we really know ourselves? In a conversation about her short story “To Be a Man”, the American writer Nicole Krauss was asked about the “thin line” that marks the relationship b …
Shakin' Stevens: 'I was over the moon playing Elvis. The first time I got a regular wage' Something momentous happened in January 1980, something that profoundly affected the British charts for the most of the following decade: Shakin’ Stev …
Out of Thin Air by Michael Crawley review – the secrets of marathon success If you watch any major marathon in the world, almost without exception you will see a group of Kenyan and Ethiopian runners battling it out at the fro …
Diplo denies claim that he threatened to distribute revenge porn A Los Angeles woman has filed a restraining order against Diplo, AKA Thomas Wesley Pentz, seeking to prevent the producer from “distributing revenge p …
Lil Wayne faces up to 10 years in jail on weapons possession charges The rapper Lil Wayne (AKA Dwayne Michael Carter Jr) has been charged with weapons possession and faces up to 10 years in prison if convicted. Carter’s …
Richard Strauss: where to start with his music Richard Strauss (1864-1949) dominated classical music at the turn of the 20th century with a series of works that pushed post-Romanticism to extremes …
Sybille Bedford by Selina Hastings review – a huge appetite for life The novelist Sybille Bedford is the patron saint of writers who hate writing. She described the actual act as “tearing, crushing, defeating agony” and …
When it comes to a family trauma, who gets to tell the story? In her 1861 account Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, Harriet Jacobs exposed her sexual abuse by her master with lucidity and truth. Yet for more …
Bruce Swedien, studio engineer for Michael Jackson, dies aged 86 Summary: Bruce Swedien, the studio engineer who helped define Michael Jackson’s 1980s sound, has died aged 86. His daughter Roberta said he had died in his sle …
All I want for Christmas is normality: festive hits chart earlier than ever Summary: This year’s Christmas is set to look rather different, with smaller gatherings, shuttered high streets and lower-stakes seasonal ads. New data, howeve …
The War Against the BBC review – in defence of a national institution Patrick Barwise and Peter York must be miffed that the phantom controversy in August over patriotic songs at the Last Night of the Proms came too late …
Girls Against God by Jenny Hval review –  a call to revolution Girls Against God, the second novel from acclaimed Norwegian musician Jenny Hval, is set in 1990s southern Norway, a place known for its “rainy climat …
Radio 1 to air censored version of Pogues' Fairytale of New York Summary: BBC Radio 1 is to air a censored version of the Pogues’ Fairytale of New York that removes the words “faggot” and “slut” from Kirsty MacColl’s verse. …
Unseen JRR Tolkien essays on Middle-earth coming in 2021 A previously unpublished collection of writings by JRR Tolkien, exploring the world of Middle-earth in essays tackling topics ranging from Elvish rein …
The Idea of the Brain by Matthew Cobb review – lighting up the grey matter Is your brain a computer? Is mine? Is Boris Johnson’s? And if so, where is the tech support hotline? Brains were once conceived of as marvellous clock …
Shabaka Hutchings/Britten Sinfonia/Paterson review - tangible exhilaration If Aaron Copland enjoyed writing his Clarinet Concerto for Benny Goodman, he would have loved the chance to write for Shabaka Hutchings. Mainly on sax …
Slide away: Swindon waterpark that gave Oasis their name to close Oasis, the Swindon leisure centre that gave one of the UK’s biggest bands its name, is to close down. Operators of the facility, which features a wate …
Star Wars author appeals to Disney in fight over royalties Summary: Disney has been accused of failing to pay royalties to the acclaimed author Alan Dean Foster for his bestselling novelisations of films including Star …
Cabaret Voltaire: Shadow of Fear review – a fittingly dystopian fantasy from Sheffield's industrial pioneers Between 1974 and 1994, Cabaret Voltaire made a career out of being slightly ahead of the curve. They may well have been the world’s first industrial b …
Infinite Splendours by Sofie Laguna review – a sad and sublime tale of trauma and art Summary: The title of Sofie Laguna’s latest book is taken from a letter from French artist, Jean-Francois Millet, best known for his works of rural beatificati …
Should the BBC have censored Fairytale of New York? The Radio 1 listener: Alex Hood A culture war around the Pogues’ song Fairytale of New York feels like a new Christmas tradition, like a Lindt chocola …
Douglas Stuart wins Booker prize for debut Shuggie Bain Summary: The Scottish-American author Douglas Stuart has won the Booker prize for his first novel, Shuggie Bain, a story based on his own life that follows a b …
Douglas Stuart's Booker win heralds arrival of a fully formed voice Though there were four debuts on the Booker shortlist, it’s been more than a decade since a debut won. And with two magisterial novels from establishe …
As Donald Trump refuses to concede: the etymology of 'coup' As Donald Trump sulked in the White House after the election and refused to concede defeat, many wondered if he was plotting a “coup”, in the sense of …
The Ministry for the Future by Kim Stanley Robinson review – how to solve the climate crisis Summary: It opens like a slow-motion disaster movie. In the near future, a heatwave of unsurvivable “wet-bulb” temperatures (factoring in humidity) in a small …
$5 gigs, not $10m deals: the story of US punk label Dischord Records “Do you know what I call an un-played record?” asks Ian MacKaye. “A piece of fucking trash. It’s paper and plastic. So if I make something, I want to …
Contento: Lo Bueno Está Aquí review – 'salsapunks' invent a joyful hybrid In the 1960s, salsa’s sprightly piano melodies, clave rhythms and syncopated percussion took off in New York, and its deeply kinetic combination becam …
The Weirdest People in the World review – a theory-of-everything study Summary: Why did Europe play such an outsized role in human history? A generation ago, the geographer Jared Diamond offered an elegant answer in his book Guns, …
Céline Dion loses $13m dispute with concert agent Summary: Céline Dion has lost a $13m dispute with her former concert agent, who she accused of being “wildly” overpaid for a $489m (£370m) negotiation he made …
The best recent crime and thrillers – review roundup Author of the Dublin Murder Squad series Tana French has described her second standalone, The Searcher (Viking, £14.99), as her take on a western, and …
Jason Reynolds: 'Snoop Dogg once told white folks: 'I know you hate me. But your kids don't.' That's how I feel' In any other year, Jason Reynolds would be travelling up and down the US visiting schools and juvenile detention centres to speak to children, sometim …
Natalia Lafourcade and Residente win big at 2020 Latin Grammy awards Summary: Spanish pop star Alejandro Sanz, Mexican folk-pop singer Natalia Lafourcade and Puerto Rican rapper Residente were the biggest winners at the 2020 Lat …
Jamie Lynn Spears: 'Britney created so much power for herself – I wanted that too' Jamie Lynn Spears was sitting in a car, surrounded by screaming fans, when it finally hit her. Of course, she knew her sister Britney was successful – …
Rodney P admits assaulting two women British hip-hop artist Rodney P has admitted assaulting an ex-girlfriend who told the BBC that she feared for her life after he hit her in the face an …
Jan Morris, historian, travel writer and trans pioneer, dies aged 94 Jan Morris, the historian and travel writer who evoked time and place with the flair of a novelist, has died aged 94. As a journalist Morris broke mon …
Megan Thee Stallion: Good News review – galloping into greatness On YouTube, you can still see one of Megan Thee Stallion’s early appearances at a 2016 rap cypher in Houston. It’s a very telling performance. Twenty- …
Elena Ferrante names her 40 favourite books by female authors Elena Ferrante, the bestselling pseudonymous Italian author behind My Brilliant Friend, has named her favourite 40 books by female authors around the …
Booker winner Douglas Stuart: 'I owe Scotland everything' Summary: As a boy in working-class Glasgow, one of the ways Douglas Stuart learned to cope with his alcoholic mother’s mood swings was to pretend to write her …
Alan Rickman's 27 volumes of diaries to be published as one book The diaries of the late actor Alan Rickman are to be published, with 27 handwritten volumes of his “witty, gossipy and utterly candid” thoughts about …
Yungblud: 'Me and Lewis Capaldi used to get into all sorts of trouble' Summary: Self-professed punk and anointed voice of a generation Yungblud has done himself a mischief. The day before our interview, while sporting a pair of ti …
We're already getting Christmas ads – did 2020 run away from us? The festive holiday adverts have started. When did companies decide that mid-November was the time to kick off the festive period? Has it always been …
Can American democracy survive Donald Trump? “I WON THE ELECTION!” Donald Trump tweeted in the early hours of 16 November 2020, 10 days after he lost the election. At the same time, Atlantic maga …
Island Dreams by Gavin Francis; I Am an Island by Tamsin Calidas – review In a year of lockdown and isolation, books about islands seem a good place to turn for comfort and to reflect on our predicament. There are many to ch …
How 'woke' became the word of our era Summary: As I write this, I’m staring at a fashion magazine with the coverline “Woke bespoke”. Next to it, a newspaper supplement features a dating diary of th …
The week in classical: L'enfant et les sortilèges; Love Lies and Justice – review “The phantasmagoria is constant,” Ravel said – needlessly – of his magic-filled opera L’enfant et les sortilèges (The Child and the Spells). This shor …
Neil Young: Archives Vol II: 1972-1976 review – guitar duels, live jams and onstage banter If you’re fresh to the news that the second instalment in Neil Young’s epochal archive striptease is finally upon us, it’s already too late. The 3,000 …
Katy Carr: Providence review – Anglo-Polish ballads of freedom Nottingham-born singer Katy Carr has followed a singular grail over recent years, exploring her Polish heritage on 2012’s Paszport and 2015’s Polonia, …
Stella Dadzie: 'Women resisted slavery at every stage of the journey' Stella Dadzie was born in London in 1952 and is best known for The Heart of the Race: Black Women’s Lives in Britain, co-authored with Beverley Bryan …
A Promised Land by Barack Obama review – behind the power and the pomp Like the best autobiographers, Barack Obama writes about himself in the hope of discovering who or even what he is. It’s a paradoxical project for a m …
Luke Abbott: Translate review – lush and cavernous Sinister and grandiose, hectic and bucolic, Norfolk producer Luke Abbott’s third album accretes big sense impressions from some wildly disparate sourc …
Slowthai: 'I know who I am, I know what I stand for' Dressed – half-dressed – in a yellow tracksuit top and black shorts, Slowthai looks like a man who’s just got up, because he has (it’s 2.45pm). The No …
Remembering Selena: the legacy of a murdered star Luis Miguel Ramírez can still remember where he was when he heard that Selena Quintanilla, the biggest star on the Tejano music scene, had been shot d …
God 99 by Hassan Blasim review – brutal take on refugee trauma Hassan Blasim, winner of the Independent foreign fiction prize for The Iraqi Christ, conveys the violence of conflict and the bleakness of the refugee …
Ariodante review – Paula Murrihy dazzles in Handel's dark drama Handel wrote Ariodante in 1735 for the Covent Garden theatre that stood on the site of what is now the Royal Opera House, so the Royal Opera’s decisio …
In brief: Lost Cat; Lake of Urine; LEL – review Lost Cat Mary Gaitskill Daunt Books, £8.99, 120pp (paperback) Award-winning novelist Mary Gaitskill pivots towards memoir in this book-length essay, b …
Tayla Parx: Coping Mechanisms review – a treat of a breakup album Summary: Grammy-nominated for her work with Ariana Grande, Texan Tayla Parx is best known for her songwriting for other people. Increasingly, though, she looks …
Could Steve McQueen start a lovers rock revival with Small Axe? One of the most memorable moments in Steve McQueen’s Lovers Rock – the latest film in his five-part anthology series Small Axe – comes when a room ful …
Dearly by Margaret Atwood review – the experience of a lifetime Summary: Margaret Atwood does not do nostalgia. This collection of poems, her first in over 10 years, is a reckoning with the past that comes from a place of w …
Taylor Swift named artist of the year at American Music Awards Taylor Swift has extended her lead as the most awarded star in American Music Awards history, with three wins on a night that also rewarded Justin Bie …
London's Latin pop explosion: 'The body decodes the music's meaning' Summary: In the UK, Spanish-language pop generally equates to exoticised summer smashes like Livin’ La Vida Loca and Mambo No 5. Hits such as Despacito and Mi …
Oxford Dictionaries: 2020 has too many Words of the Year to name just one Summary: For the first time, the Oxford English Dictionary has chosen not to name a word of the year, describing 2020 as “a year which cannot be neatly accommo …
Poem of the week: Blowing Smoke by Nii Ayikwei Parkes Blowing Smoke for the curve of dismounts o She lifts her head to gift the stars white smoke and my lips are drawn to the floral arch of her neck, inch …
The Seven Deadly Sins review – Hollywood highs and Depression lows with uncanny resonances It’s not simply the cardinal sins of Roman Catholic theology that are invoked in Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht’s sung ballet, their last collaboration …
News and How to Use It by Alan Rusbridger review – an insider's appeal to sceptics Summary: “Mummy, what is that man for?” was the question famously asked by a young girl at a rally addressed (at great length) by Gladstone. An analogous quest …
Ralph Steadman: 'We're really living in a hell of a year, aren't we?' When the Welsh artist Ralph Steadman picks up the phone, he sounds a bit paranoid. “It’s Friday the 13th, you know,” he says with a doomsday tone. “I’ …
Nines tops nominations for first Mobo awards since 2017 The Mobo awards, which celebrate music of Black origin, have announced the nominees for their first ceremony since 2017, championing a banner year for …
Aria awards 2020: Billie Eilish, Sia and Sam Smith gear up for Australian music's biggest night This far into the global pandemic we’re pretty used to televised award ceremonies looking a little different. But for the Australian music industry’s …
Beatles biography One Two Three Four wins Baillie Gifford prize Craig Brown has won the Baillie Gifford prize, the UK’s top award for nonfiction, for One Two Three Four: The Beatles in Time, a take on the band that …
Beyoncé tops 2021 Grammy nominations in strong field for women Beyoncé has topped the nominees for the 2021 Grammy awards, heading up a year that celebrated female artistry right across pop genres – but there were …
BTS become first K-pop act to receive a Grammy nomination The South Korean megastars BTS have notched up yet another achievement by becoming the first K-pop act to receive a Grammy nomination. The boy band’s …
'Frank didn't adhere to any movements': behind the Zappa documentary In the decades since the death of Frank Zappa, scores of film-makers had approached his wife and business partner Gail about making a documentary abou …
The Weeknd alleges Grammys corruption after nominations snub Summary: Canadian pop star the Weeknd has said the Grammys “remain corrupt” after receiving no nominations in the latest awards list for his 2020 album After H …
Exclusive: watch two short films inspired by a locked-down City of London Summary: The City of London, once the vibrant and bustling centre with hundreds of thousands of workers filling the streets of the Square Mile each day, has be …
British Library apologises for linking Ted Hughes to slave trade The British Library has apologised to Carol Hughes, the widow of the former poet laureate Ted Hughes, after it linked him to the slave trade through a …
From Vivaldi to Vaughan Williams: more musical voices who have changed our world The aim of the Know the score series was straightforward. To assist the reader who is curious about classical music, and to help them find some entry …
Aria awards 2020: Archie Roach and Sampa the Great electrify as Tame Impala win big Hip-hop artist Sampa the Great called out the lack of diversity of the Australian music industry in general – and of the Australian Recording Industry …
Staff at Jordan Peterson's publisher protest new book plans The announcement of a new book from Canadian psychologist Jordan Peterson, the self-styled “professor against political correctness”, has prompted doz …
Luke Rhinehart obituary George Cockcroft, who has died aged 87, was known more widely, if not much better, as Luke Rhinehart, author and protagonist of The Dice Man, a 1971 n …
Taylor Swift: The Long Pond Studio Sessions review – cosy campfire confessions Summary: Pre-pandemic, few artists were so keenly attuned to the music industry’s calendar as Taylor Swift. She timed her album releases for awards contention …
Powderfinger's new album is a rewarding peek into the past Albums of Odds & Sods (the name the Who gave to one of the first compilations of rarities, released in 1974 in an attempt to short-circuit bootleggers …
Lorde urges climate action ahead of new book on Antarctica trip The singer Lorde has written an impassioned entreaty for the world to face the climate emergency head-on after visiting Antarctica. Lorde said Donald …
Pandemic, lockdown and Megxit: the most influential words of 2020 How do we get new words and how do old words get a fresh twist? In normal times, it’s a well-worn process, linguistic business as usual. There will be …
A Promised Land by Barack Obama review – an impressive but incomplete memoir Summary: “I guess the question for you, Mr President, is: ‘Do you feel lucky?’” In his new autobiography, Barack Obama recalls being asked this by his director …
Drake calls for Grammys to be replaced after snubbing Black artists Drake has called for the Grammys be replaced with “something new that we can build up over time and pass on to the generations to come”, after it fail …
Regards sur l'Infini review – glowing, intriguing French chamber music For most chamber music partners, 2020 has been a year of jarring discontinuity, but for a few – those with a spare room, no family commitments and the …
‘Take what’s in front of you’: Erthlings on tackling uncertainty – and the HSC – amid a pandemic When Jessame Stepto left class one day in late March, her whole year group was “standing there in tears”, she says. Her inner-city Sydney school had t …
Factory 19 by Dennis Glover review – an Orwellian dystopia in Tasmania's near future The past was of concern to George Orwell: its capacity to be shaped – even replaced – by those in power. As the Oceania citizens intone in Nineteen Ei …
'People in their 40s were crying': the sad final days of New York's coolest record store A lot of skulking went on at Other Music, the celebrated New York record store. It was an odd kind of dance: nervous customers, hiding behind CD racks …
A Dog Pissing at the Edge of a Path wins oddest book title of the year A Dog Pissing at the Edge of a Path has beaten Introducing the Medieval Ass to win the Diagram prize for oddest book title of the year. Both books are …
Nile Rodgers' guitar and a £10,000 prog rock box set: auctions fight for UK music If you’re the wealthy offspring or partner of a prog rock fan, the ultimate Christmas present idea has appeared: a £10,000 box set by the scene’s curr …
Miley Cyrus: Plastic Hearts review – too plastic, but has heart Summary: Six years ago, Miley Cyrus’s Bangerz tour arrived in London. It was as ludicrous and ludicrously entertaining a stadium pop show as anyone is ever lik …
An Event, Perhaps by Peter Salmon review – a timely biography of Jacques Derrida Jacques Derrida was born in Algiers in 1930 to a Jewish family of Spanish extraction. His parents named him after Jackie Coogan, the child star of Cha …
Flohio: No Panic No Pain review – rapper leaves no mould unbroken Flohio escapes labels. In fact, she actively contests them, asserting she’s not a grime artist as so many observers assume London rappers are. Since 2 …
Nigella Lawson: 'I reread David Copperfield for a bolstering reminder of greatness' The book I am currently reading I’m suffering from crippling reader’s block. I had months of it during the earliest months of the first long lockdown, …
Endless summer: why sunny, out-of-season albums are in this winter A pox upon those smug sweater-weather fans who are still strangely horny for pumpkin spiced lattes after all these years. As seasonal Stockholm syndro …
Passing sentences … what’s the worst kind of book thief? Summary: A 13th-century inscription in an early copy of Bede’s commentary on the Gospel of Saint Luke (originally from Reading Abbey and now in the British Lib …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 27 November - 4 December Australian Chamber Orchestra The Barbican continues its association with Richard Tognetti and his outstanding band with a three-day digital residency. …
Eleanor review: sensitive and superb biography of a true American giant As the 2020 US presidential election winds toward a tortuous and dysfunctional certification, it is tempting to imagine that intrigue and machinations …
From Doctor Who to hackers: how we came to live in 'cyber' times The UK government has announced it will splosh billions of pounds more on the Ministry of Defence, which does not defend citizens from viruses. This m …
Russian Roulette: The Life and Times of Graham Greene review – addicted to danger Summary: When Gabriel García Márquez, in the presence of Fidel Castro, asked Graham Greene if it was true that he’d played Russian roulette with a loaded revol …
Jacob Collier: 'weirdo' Brit to battle for Grammy album of the year He has been compared to Mozart by Chris Martin and likened to Bernstein by BBC Proms director David Pickard. Until this week, however, Jacob Collier w …
Best crime and thrillers of 2020 Summary: Whether because crime fiction is familiar or because its narratives usually contain a resolution, it has proved to be more popular than ever in 2020. …
Best comics and graphic novels of 2020 In a year in which Covid-19 and Brexit made borders an even hotter topic, some of the finest graphic novels told migrants’ stories. Welcome to the New …
Best art books of 2020 Summary: The most evil of years got off to an innocent start with the February publication of Blake Gopnik’s fabulously joyful Andy Warhol (Allen Lane). Workin …
Best stocking filler books of 2020 Essex Girls by Sarah Perry (Serpent’s Tail) “For profane and opinionated women everywhere”, this dinky pocket-size book by the Essex Serpent author – …
Best children’s and teens books of 2020 This painful year has produced some inspiring books full of poetry, adventure, powerful emotion and consoling humour. Oliver Jeffers’s newly released …
Best sports books of 2020 Summary: The Farther Corner by Harry Pearson (Simon & Schuster) More than a quarter-century after The Far Corner, Pearson, older and perhaps a bit sadder, retu …
Best nature books of 2020 Diary of a Young Naturalist by Dara McAnulty (Little Toller) A 15-year-old boy’s diary of wildlife around his home sounds unremarkable, but Dara McAnu …
Best fiction of 2020 As the first lockdown descended in March, sales of Defoe’s A Journal of the Plague Year and Camus’s La Peste soared, but there were uncanny echoes of …
Best autobiography and memoirs of 2020 Summary: In Motherwell: A Girlhood (W&N), the late author and columnist Deborah Orr reflects on her childhood in the eponymous Scottish steel town and her rela …
Best science books of 2020 Summary: In one of many unexpected outcomes of 2020, “the science” has become big news. Politicians are claiming it, protesters are disputing it, and all of a …
Best science fiction and fantasy books of 2020 The Ministry for the Future by Kim Stanley Robinson, Orbit Robinson is a writer who believes fiction can make a difference to the world. His latest is …
Best poetry books of 2020 While the pandemic might have stopped poets gathering physically, poetry itself is in good health. This year books of urgency and contemplation have j …
Best cookbooks and food writing of 2020 Too many cookbooks have had a cushy time sitting on coffee tables and enjoying the quiet life. This year, things changed and they really had to earn t …
Classical home listening: Schumann and Schubert string quartets and more • Robert Schumann, who suffered mood swings and periods of severe mental instability, wrote his three string quartets in the “miracle” year of 1842. T …
The week in classical: Ariodante; Royal Northern Sinfonia; BCMG; HCMF; Bath Mozart festival – review Elation at the miracles star musicians can achieve in an empty theatre; regret at not being there in person – both reactions made watching the Royal O …
One to watch: Porij Squeaky-new foursome Porij (as in porridge) became a proper band quicker than they’d planned. Eggy (vocals and keys), Tommy (vocals and guitar), Jammo …
Gabriel Latchin Trio: I'll Be Home for Christmas review – the gift that keeps on giving For my money, London-born Gabriel Latchin is the best straight-ahead jazz pianist to appear in the past few years. Polished technique we now take as n …
Greatest Southern Nights featuring Ocean Alley review – Australia's live music comeback is a tepid affair Even before arriving on a filthily hot day to Sydney’s Olympic Park, the adjectives about Saturday night’s big gig have been beefed up into superlativ …
Let Us Dream by Pope Francis review – the holy father of fraternity Not long into these reflections on the lessons of a traumatic year, Pope Francis offers a line from his favourite poet, Friedrich Hölderlin: “Where th …
The photo is the clue: Arthur Conan Doyle’s love for his Lost World hero Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s Professor Challenger, the fictional scientist and explorer who discovers a forgotten land of dinosaurs, went on to inspire a …
Miley Cyrus: Plastic Hearts review – mock rock Throughout a decade careening gleefully from pop to R&B to country, Miley Cyrus has needed no urging to drop a rock cover. Her unforced simpatico for …
You Exist Too Much by Zaina Arafat review – self-destructive search for love Summary: Zaina Arafat’s debut novel follows an unnamed young Palestinian-American woman through “a misguided and self-destructive quest for love”, as she repea …
‘You need to look outside your own window’: the winner of our graphic short story prize 2020 In Similar to But Not, the winner of this year’s Observer/Jonathan Cape graphic short story prize, a prematurely aged teenager visits his local pub ho …
Smashing Pumpkins: Cyr review – infinite flatness Summary: Although Smashing Pumpkins are no strangers to synths, they have always remained a guitar band at heart. And yet Cyr, the second album since three-qua …
Flohio: No Panic No Pain – a seething statement of intent Since she first pricked up ears with her impish flow and shadowy beats four years ago, 28-year-old south Londoner Flohio has always given the impressi …
Don't go breaking my art: it's time to axe the mood-ruining, bar-scrambling interval Summary: When my book Rough Ideas was published last year I, like everyone else on the planet, had no idea how much and how quickly life in 2020 would change w …
Michael Brooks obituary My father, Michael Brooks, who has died aged 85, was a Grammy award-winning archivist, historian and producer who introduced American roots music to a …
Roger Farrand obituary My friend Roger Farrand, who has died aged 86, was publisher and then owner of the quarterly Printmaking Today magazine, which has provided a much-nee …
Royal Society of Literature reveals historic changes to improve diversity The late Andrea Levy, author of the award-winning Windrush novel Small Island, is to become the first writer of colour to have her pen join the Royal …
Desperately seeking headbangers: the lonely hearts who found love in the back pages From headbangers in Hastings to new romantics in Norwich, pen pals and lonely hearts columns were a staple of music magazines from the 1970s to the 19 …
The 20 best songs of 2020 We kick off our end of 2020 music coverage with Guardian critics’ favourite songs, with our album of the year countdown starting tomorrow. As ever, ea …
The best song of 2020: Rain on Me by Lady Gaga and Ariana Grande Behind the illness, grief, political failure, racist violence, unemployment and myriad other acutely painful moments, 2020’s lesser sin is that it has …
The Walker by Matthew Beaumont review – an urban wanderland In a scene in James Joyce’s Ulysses, Leopold Bloom walks to and from a butcher’s shop in Dublin in the early morning, his imagination roaming freely f …
Collected Stories by Shirley Hazzard review – testament to a rare talent Shirley Hazzard produced only four novels in a writing life that spanned nearly five decades, and was principally known – at least at the beginning of …
Poem of the week: Afterwardness by Mimi Khalvati Summary: Afterwardness An eleven-year-old boy from Aleppo whose eyes hold only things no longer there – a citadel, a moat, safe rooms of shadow, ‘afterwardness …
Enemies of the sheeple: why do pop stars fall for conspiracy theories? In the Guide’s weekly Solved! column, we look into a crucial pop-culture question you’ve been burning to know the answer to – and settle it, once and …
Guy Garvey says music fans should pay more for streaming services Summary: Music fans have to be prepared to pay more for the songs they love in the streaming age, according to Elbow’s Guy Garvey, who says the next generation …
Stereophonics: how we made Dakota Kelly Jones, singer/songwriter A lot of early Stereophonics songs were written while I was working in the market back in Cwmaman. Some afternoons, you …
Hervé Le Tellier wins Prix Goncourt as France's books world begins to reopen France’s oldest and most celebrated literary award the Prix Goncourt has been awarded to novelist Hervé Le Tellier, a trained mathematician and former …
Rita Ora likely to escape fine for breaking lockdown with party The singer Rita Ora is likely to escape a personal fine after breaching Covid rules to attend her birthday party at a Notting Hill restaurant, but the …
The Arrest by Jonathan Lethem review – a retrofuturistic ride You could trace an interesting history of recent western culture through its dystopias. From Zamyatin’s We to Brave New World to Nineteen Eighty-Four …
The best recent thrillers – review roundup The Searcher Tana French Viking, £14.99, pp400 Cal Hooper is a disillusioned former Chicago police officer who has left the force and moved to a remot …
Nigerian pop star Davido: 'Africans were made fun of. Now everyone wants us' The buoyant, trumpeting chords of Fem, the opening track on Davido’s fourth album, A Better Time, suggest an artist who is vivacious, free of self-dou …
K-pop stars BTS extend career by two years after military service law change Summary: A change in South Korean law has effectively extended the lifespan of the boyband BTS, currently the world’s most successful pop group. South Korean m …
Nick Cave accuses BBC of 'mutilating' Fairytale of New York Nick Cave has accused the BBC of “mutilating” Fairytale of New York, following the broadcaster’s recent decision to play a censored version of the Pog …
Arthur Calder-Marshall, the forgotten author Orson Welles almost made famous The Way to Santiago (1941) is a heady hybrid of spy thriller, murder mystery, gun-toting adventure and sleek noir, playing out against the dusty lands …
Rick Morton, Alice Pung, Stan Grant, Anita Heiss and others: the books to look forward to in 2021 Every year brings an abundance of delectable new titles to cram your bookshelf but 2021 promises to be an especially fruitful one, considering that ma …
Billie Eilish talks to younger Billie Eilish – with both wisdom and wit In 2009, a website went viral – it allowed you to send yourself a message that would automatically turn up in your inbox three years later. A friend o …
Musicians fear reprisals for speaking to MPs' streaming inquiry A Commons select committee has warned that no one should interfere with its inquiry into the economics of music streaming, after witnesses expressed f …
The Avalanches' teenage obsessions: 'I cried hearing Strawberry Fields Forever' Tony Di Blasi My first guitar When I went to high school we had one free term of extracurricular activities – I chose guitar. I wouldn’t say it was li …
Tell us about your favourite books of 2020 As CS Lewis is quoted as saying in William Nicholson’s play Shadowlands, “we read to know we are not alone”. As the world came to a standstill and ent …
Dirt by Bill Buford review – how to cook like a French chef When he was merely middle-aged, Bill Buford quit as the fiction editor of the New Yorker to learn to become an Italian chef. That was a decade and a h …
The EU anthem: Ode to Joy – archive, 1972 Joyful Europe 20 January 1972 The Council of Europe has selected the prelude to Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony as the official Hymn of Europe, and it will …
Top 10 Shakespearean books The world’s libraries contain thousands of books on England’s national poet, in every language under the sun. Writers such as Milton, Dryden, Pope, Dr …
'My coolness has disintegrated': how pop stars cope with fatherhood This summer, two of the world’s biggest pop stars became parents for the first time. Katy Perry told an interviewer that after becoming pregnant, “a l …
Without Ethel Smyth and classical music's forgotten women, we only tell half the story Summary: In 1934, all of musical England gathered to celebrate the 75th birthday of one the country’s most famous composers – Dame Ethel Smyth. During a festiv …
A third of UK children do not see themselves reflected in books, finds survey A third of children in the UK do not see themselves in the books they read, according to a survey of almost 60,000 children and young people by the Na …
English bookshops reopen, hoping for Christmas trade rescue after lockdown At The Bookshop in Liskeard, Cornwall, the first customer through the door on Wednesday snapped up The Sentinel by Lee and Andrew Child, while the sec …
Fine Young Cannibal Roland Gift: 'I went back to where being pretty didn't matter' There are no film posters up in Roland Gift’s house in Holloway, London, and the platinum discs are all packed away. It’s a home that gives few clues …
The Free Speech Wars review – from censorship to cancel culture Free speech is impossible. Merely to be intelligible, all communication depends on shared rules. Some of those are basic (you can read this because we …
Leave the World Behind by Rumaan Alam review – an X-ray of America An unexpected knock at the door. It’s the narrative spark of children’s jokes, fairytales and campfire ghost stories, of drawing-room dramas and horro …
Shawn Mendes: Wonder review – pop's nicest man needs a personality ‘Why are we wasting time?” wailed Shawn Mendes on Treat You Better, the multiplatinum hit from his last album, Illuminate. It’s a sentiment you find y …
Campaign to buy JRR Tolkien's house backed by Lord of the Rings actors A quest to save the home of JRR Tolkien has begun, with Gandalf and Bilbo Baggins – or at least their earthly counterparts – joining the bid to turn t …
'We're the UK's biggest boy band!' Michael Ball and Alfie Boe, the new kings of Christmas “We’ve topped the charts more than Wham! or Chas & Dave? We’re a mixture of them both,” jokes Michael Ball. I have just informed Ball and Alfie Boe th …
Golijov: Falling Out of Time review – meditation on grief is an allusive patchwork In the early years of this century, the Argentinian Osvaldo Golijov was one of the most sought-after composers around. In works such as the choral St …
Genesis Owusu, Missy Higgins, Kymie and more: Australia's best new music for December Missy Higgins – When the Machine Starts For fans of: Something for Kate, Lorde, Clare Bowditch Expectations have been the bane of Missy Higgins’ caree …
An Inventory of Losses by Judith Schalansky review – it can't last What, asks this book, is “more terrifying: the notion that everything comes to an end, or the thought that it may not”? Such issues – impermanence, th …
Mobo founder Kanya King: 'I’ve been fighting to break down barriers. It's isolating' Summary: “It was almost like the world had woken up,” says Kanya King, the Mobos founder, who is discussing an open letter she sent to the culture secretary, O …
Burd Ellen: Says the Never Beyond review – brilliant wintersongs make an eerie snowglobe of sound And so it is Christmas. Here’s what Burd Ellen have done: made a brilliant set of wintersongs from all across Britain that almost hovers in the air li …
Rico Nasty: Nightmare Vacation review – offbeat rapper is impossible to ignore Rico Nasty has never played nice: as her moniker suggests, she’s aggressive, in your face, and refuses to back down. Having amassed a strong cult foll …
'I am a pessimistic optimist': Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie answers authors' questions In your Ted Talk in 2009, you warned of the danger of cultural misunderstandings arising from readers hearing only a single story. Do you feel that in …
UK’s public libraries record another year of cuts, with yet more on the way The struggles of the UK’s public library service continue apace, with total funding for libraries in Britain down by nearly £20m in the year to March, …
Decline and fall: what Donald Trump can learn from the Roman emperors A lot of men have probably wished for four more years. A little under that time after assuming absolute power, Gaius Caesar was dead, assassinated by …
The Snow Ball by Brigid Brophy review – a swirling, sensual feast Summary: Facing a holiday season without the usual parties is going to be tough, but this is where a great novel comes into its own. Faber’s timely reissue of …
One two, one two: the Scottish bands teaming up to support roadies This has been a tough year for musicians, but it has been even harder on their road crews. The guitar wranglers, tech magicians and flightcase-luggers …
How did Bad Bunny become the world's biggest pop star? Each December, Spotify announces who has been the world’s most streamed artist that year, and this generally tallies with who has been popular in the …
Classical highlights for the week ahead:  4 - 11 December Royal Northern Sinfonia The Third Symphony by Louise Farrenc, composed in 1847, is given a rare performance. The conductor Duncan Ward programmes it a …
Alison Lurie obituary Few writers have shown such a commitment to their characters as the US novelist Alison Lurie, who has died aged 94. Her 11 works of domestic and acade …
The Creatures of Prometheus – Philharmonia's fun and witty take on Beethoven's ballet The Philharmonia is marking this year’s Beethoven anniversary with a rare complete outing for The Creatures of Prometheus, Beethoven’s only ballet, fi …
Ian Rankin to complete William McIlvanney’s final novel The Dark Remains Ian Rankin has spent most of lockdown writing a novel – but it isn’t a new Rebus. Instead, the Scottish writer has been putting the finishing touches …
That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry – beautifully pitched short stories “Here’s a very old joke – Cause of Death: the west of Ireland.” The misfits and mavericks who people Kevin’s Barry’s third short story collection are …
Have You Heard George’s Podcast? You should, for it is remarkable I have never been into podcasts in a big way. I like them in theory, but if I’ve got time to listen to something, I’d rather listen to music. And when …
Alex Wheatle: ‘I have nightmarish moments where my past comes back and hits me’ Amid the brunchtime clatter of a busy south London cafe, Alex Wheatle is talking about how, lately, he has been considering 1970s pop culture and the …
Life without Air by Daisy Lafarge review – ecological poetry Summary: The novelist and poet Daisy Lafarge’s TS Eliot prize shortlisted debut collection offers a fresh kind of ecological poetry, one that merges a lyric vo …
From Messiah to Jonas Kaufmann: the best classical Christmas albums of 2020 This year’s heap of Christmas albums is smaller, but the balance has shifted: plenty of novelty and baroque discovery from outstanding choirs, only on …
Michel Faber: 'Under the Skin changed my life for good' In 1993, I emigrated from a big, thriving, multicultural city in Australia to a failing farm in the tranquil isolation of the Scottish Highlands. The …
The Sixteen: A Choral Odyssey review – an inspired journey through music and history The Sixteen made a smart decision in choosing Simon Russell Beale as guide to their online A Choral Odyssey, a series of filmed performances in differ …
One to watch: King Hannah Lessons in how to set tables don’t often feature in bands’ creation myths, but that was the catalyst that brought the core members of Liverpool’s King …
M Ward: Think of Spring review – a spectral tribute to Billie Holiday West coast singer-songwriter Matthew Ward stalks Americana circles in many guises; as solo artist, guitarist to Norah Jones, collaborator with the lik …
Rita Ora apologises for second breach of Covid lockdown restrictions British singer Rita Ora has apologised after reports emerged that she should have been self-isolating when she celebrated her birthday at a London res …
Spain's forgotten literary star from a turbulent age is rescued from oblivion Towards the end of a long life that was more eventful, more peripatetic and more exquisitely chronicled than most, María Teresa León came to a painful …
The book of love: 400-year-old tome of John Donne’s poems is unveiled Summary: John Donne is hailed as one of the greatest writers in the English canon, the author of exquisite love poetry and magnificent prose that has entered e …
The Godless Gospel by Julian Baggini review – Jesus as a moral teacher Not all Christians believe in God. Back in the 1960s, a cult of so-called religionless Christianity briefly thrived, along with people who called them …
The best books of 2020 – picked by our acclaimed guest authors Douglas Stuart Author of Booker prize winner Shuggie Bain Elaine Feeney’s As You Were (Harvill Secker, £14.99) is a revelation with regard to the secr …
10 great food books of 2020 The Flavor Equation: The Science of Great Cooking Explained in More Than 100 Essential Recipes Nik Sharma (Chronicle Books) Sharma, a former molecular …
Roald Dahl's family apologises for his antisemitism The family of Roald Dahl has apologised for his antisemitism in a statement buried deep in the author’s official website. Dahl, who died 30 years ago, …
Jung Chang: ‘Most Chinese people in my generation experienced starvation. You could feel it around you’ I meet Jung Chang between lockdowns – our lunch is the first time she has eaten out since the spring. “I feel liberated!” she says, a phrase that mean …
Sigur Rós: Odin's Raven Magic – bold orchestral manoeuvres from 2004 If the road to hell is indeed paved with discarded copies of rock artists’ inglorious forays into classical music, from Deep Purple to Sting, then at …
Liam Gallagher: Down By the River Thames review – barging through his back catalogue Other livestreams have sold themselves on everything from dazzling displays of the latest technology or promises they could somehow recreate the atmos …
Rico Nasty: Nightmare Vacation review – a pummelling debut Summary: If 2020 is our nightmare vacation from normal life, then Maryland 23-year-old Rico Nasty is an entertainingly misfit holiday rep. On her debut album, …
Open thread: What's the perfect song to play as this terrible year ends? How do you farewell a year like 2020? By screaming increasingly vulgar profanities until it goes away? By celebrating its final demise with as many pe …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 10: Moses Sumney – Græ Moses Sumney’s music is often two things at once. Intimate yet communal, spiritual yet lustful, his piercingly clear falsetto is interchangeable with …
UK music streaming startup backed by Kylie secures £13m funding Summary: A British music streaming startup backed by Kylie Minogue and Robbie Williams has secured multimillion-pound funding from investors including the form …
Young Heroes of the Soviet Union by Alex Halberstadt - review “You came here as my grandson, not my interrogator,” Alex Halberstadt’s grandfather Vassily remarks to him when the writer visits him in the Ukrainian …
Poem of the week: My Stranger by Maria Taylor My Stranger hangs where the plaster cracked and the ribs of the house show. He’s the only stranger I can afford, a middle-aged man in a plaid shirt sm …
Spitalfields music festival: At Home review This year’s Spitalfields Music, like so many festivals, took to the digisphere with a varied sequence of performances and talk programmed across a sin …
Royal Northern Sinfonia/Ward review – elegance and a Farrenc gem The Royal Northern Sinfonia’s autumn series of livestreamed concerts has made a point of including at least one rarely heard work in every programme, …
How Dionne Warwick became the queen of Twitter (with a little help from Chance the Rapper) Name: Dionne Warwick. Age: 80 next week. Status: Queen of Twitter. Don’t you mean one of the greatest pop singers of all time? That was then. This is …
Rupert Webster obituary Summary: My friend Rupert Webster’s first public appearance was aged 12 as the beautiful, shy blond boy in Lindsay Anderson’s 1968 film If, a biting satire on …
Bob Dylan sells entire publishing catalogue to Universal Music Bob Dylan has sold his entire catalogue of 600 songs, including Blowin’ in the Wind and Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door, to Universal Music in the biggest m …
Bob Dylan's rights sale all part of his freewheelin' approach to business The estimated figure is pretty mind-blowing – at over $300m (£225m), it dwarfs the $22m he got for extending his publishing contract in 2010 – but it …
Nobel literature prize winner Louise Glück reveals 'panic' in acceptance speech Nobel laureate Louise Glück has revealed her “panic” at becoming the 16th female winner of the literature prize for the first time, with her acceptanc …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 9: Taylor Swift – Folklore We’ve all thought it this year: wouldn’t it be nice to escape to a cabin in the woods, to reconnect with nature, nourishing ourselves and our creative …
The Fall of a Sparrow review – Vivien Eliot, TS Eliot and 'utter hell' By the end of this exhaustive and exhausting book I felt as though I had myself been married to Vivien Eliot and barely survived to tell the tale. Oxf …
God 99 by Hassan Blasim review – history of a people's turmoil Hassan Blasim was a film-maker in his native Iraq before he was forced into exile. Harassed by the state authorities under Saddam Hussein in the late …
'It's been a battle to express my personality': Munya Chawawa, Instagram's finest satirist Summary: Any time there’s an incident that highlights the racism in British public life, Munya Chawawa will have skewered it while it’s still trending. The lig …
Neil Young drops lawsuit against Donald Trump Neil Young’s lawsuit against Donald Trump, filed in opposition to his music being used in campaign rallies, has been dismissed by a New York court. Th …
A wing and a prayer: the enduring beauty of The Lark Ascending Summary: It’s easy to make fun of The Lark Ascending. Perennially top of Classic FM’s Hall of Fame, it has become a byword for the conservatism of both schedul …
Even Keanu Reeves is doing it: why are comics going to Kickstarter? Comics have had a record-breaking year on Kickstarter. By October this year, backers had pledged $22m (£16.5m) to comics projects, up from $17m by the …
Letter: Des O’Connor was an enormously kind man Summary: Working with Des O’Connor, as I did when producing an album for him, was a delight. He would have us laughing as soon as he arrived. He once told the …
Gerry Bates obituary Summary: My friend Gerry Bates, who has died aged 78, was a well-known member of the folk music and dance scene in Sheffield: a dancer and squire of Sheffield …
US composer Harold Budd dies aged 84 Summary: Harold Budd, the left-field American composer whose work straddled minimalism, jazz, dream-pop and more, has died aged 84. A post on his official Face …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 8: J Hus – Big Conspiracy With his 2017 debut album, Common Sense, east London artist J Hus made a visceral impact. Nominated for the Mercury prize as well as pretty much every …
US rapper A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie arrested on gun and drug charges Chart-topping US rapper A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie has been arrested and charged over gun and drug offences. The 25-year-old rapper, real name Artist Juli …
'I'm a song catcher': 60 years of Arhoolie Records, the label for a lost America This year, 3 November saw two momentous events take place in the US: American voters chose Joe Biden for president and Arhoolie Records turned 60. I p …
Shawn Mendes: 'The fear strangled me. I really fell down' Shawn Mendes had a simple ambition. He wanted to be the biggest pop star in the world. At the age of 14, he taught himself guitar from YouTube videos. …
'Do we really need it?' Council leader questions library service after months of closure Walsall’s council leader has been asked to retract comments he made about the region’s libraries, closed for much of the year due to the coronavirus, …
Harold Budd's sublime music was a gateway to a brighter world It’s no coincidence that so many people discovered Harold Budd’s music this year. Restrained and sedate – even sedative – the disembodied drones and r …
Isaac Newton notes almost destroyed by dog sell for £380,000 A collection of unpublished, burnt notes by Isaac Newton, in which the scientist attempts to unlock secret codes he believed were hidden in the measur …
Evaristo says 'powerful statement' to be first black female head of UK drama school The Booker prize-winning author Bernardine Evaristo has praised her former college for making an “important statement” by installing her as the UK’s f …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 7: Haim – Women in Music Pt III “As soon as you stop looking, you’ll find it.” This is something that single people in search of love always get told, and it’s very annoying – doubly …
Daddy by Emma Cline review – an unflinching collection In the opening story of Emma Cline’s collection Daddy, a father gathers his adult children for the holidays. His daughters are distracted and hostile; …
Paul McCartney: McCartney III review – lockdown LP has his best songs in years History suggests that critics should consider treading carefully when it comes to McCartney III. Its two predecessors, 1970’s McCartney and 1980’s McC …
'If she was a bloke, she’d still be in print': the lost novels of Gertrude Trevelyan Great things were predicted for Gertrude Trevelyan in 1932, when she published her debut, Appius and Virginia, about a lonely woman who sets out to ra …
Taylor Swift announces second surprise album of 2020, Evermore Taylor Swift has announced her second surprise album of 2020, entitled Evermore. Swift describes the 17-track LP as a “sister album” to Folklore, rele …
Beethoven: The Piano Trios review – Barenboim revisits past glories Summary: Daniel Barenboim spent lockdown earlier this year practising the piano. One of the fruits of that intensive work has been his fifth complete recording …
Alison Krauss's teenage obsessions: 'My spiked hair froze on the walk to school' Tony Rice – Cold on the Shoulder Growing up in Illinois, I didn’t have teenage angst. My parents encouraged my brother and I to speak our minds and I …
Dolly Parton says she may sell her entire back catalogue of songs Dolly Parton has said that she is considering selling her back catalogue of thousands of songs, as big name artists attract sky-high valuations for th …
Jeremy Montagu obituary Summary: My father, Jeremy Montagu, who has died aged 92, was a conductor, museum curator and author who specialised in the history and origin of musical instr …
Taylor Swift: Evermore – rich alt-rock and richer character studies Anyone who feels they made insufficient use of 2020’s unexpected glut of spare time is strongly advised to avoid the prologue that Taylor Swift has wr …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 6: Waxahatchee – Saint Cloud In March, Waxahatchee’s fifth album arrived accompanied by a neat narrative hook. Saint Cloud was the first record Katie Crutchfield had made since ge …
'Oh cool, I don’t have to put on pants!' Stars on music's year of chaos Summary: Each year we convene pop stars to mull over the year’s big musical moments, and for 2020 this was – like almost every social or professional interacti …
The Last Libertines by Benedetta Craveri review – dangerous liaisons When the terrors of the French Revolution had passed, many of those aristocrats who had survived sat down to write their memoirs about the last years …
Rosie Carney: The Bends review – spirited Radiohead covers Perhaps it’s no surprise that, in 2020, many artists have indulged in the healing power of a good cover song. Marika Hackman released a dreamy LP of t …
Expert by Roger Kneebone review – the value of expertise Before the Brexit referendum in 2016, Michael Gove announced that Britain had had enough of experts, depicting them as out of touch and elitist. This …
Sonny Rollins: Rollins in Holland review – saxophone colossus on gale-force form The creative acquisitiveness of improvisation sounds boundless in the work of jazz sax master Sonny Rollins. He turned 90 in September. Every timeless …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Christmas singles special Summary: Robbie Williams Can’t Stop Christmas Williams is rereleasing his Christmas album from – checks notes – last year, with the addition of this pub rock, …
The best recent crime and thrillers – review roundup South Central Los Angeles, 1993: drug dealer Scrappy is shot and left for dead on her mother’s lawn. Addict Augie witnesses the shooting and, after ap …
The sexiest moments in literature that aren't sex scenes Writing about sex is notoriously difficult: it is irrefutable that anatomical details combined with straining prose will always produce absurdity. But …
Mariah Carey v Wham! – who should finally get their festive No 1? Story of the song All I Want for Christmas Is You Mariah Carey’s 1994 hit sounds as if it was blessed with the twinkling stardust that seems to be fal …
Songs for Europe: what music did Bowie and Iggy listen to in 1970s Berlin? David Bowie once described his 1970s Berlin trilogy – Low, “Heroes” and Lodger – as containing “a sense of yearning for a future that we all knew woul …
Édouard Louis ‘in very bad way’ after man accused of his rape has charge dropped Friends of French writer Édouard Louis say he is in a “very bad way” after the man he accused of raping him eight years ago, the subject of his bestse …
Mariah Carey's All I Want for Christmas Is You reaches UK No 1 after 26 years Mariah Carey has finally topped the UK charts with her widely beloved festive hit All I Want for Christmas Is You, 26 years after it was first release …
FKA twigs sues Shia LaBeouf for physical, mental and emotional abuse The musician FKA twigs (real name Tahliah Debrett Barnett) is suing the actor Shia LaBeouf for allegedly subjecting her to physical, emotional and men …
The Last Good Man by Thomas McMullan review – a viciously captivating debut This is a dark, compelling novel about the only two things humans really have to fear: each other, and being alone. We are apex predators: if another …
Being followed by the police at 2am, I've never felt so afraid At about 2am on Monday morning, I was driving. My car is a very unexciting and reliable one that gets me from A to B. I had my hood up for the 10-minu …
Famous first words: how celebrities made their way on to children's bookshelves What do David Walliams, Lil Nas X, Ricky Gervais, Dermot O’Leary, Geri Halliwell, Bruce Springsteen, Miranda Hart, Greg James, Chris Hoy, Frank Lampar …
Need help this Christmas? Six children's authors kids will love If you are a parent, you may remember Roald Dahl, Joan Aiken and Terry Pratchett; their heirs include Anthony Horowitz (Alex Rider, the Diamond Brothe …
Jenny Erpenbeck: ‘My experience of East Germany is changed by every book I read’ The writing of Jenny Erpenbeck has a tendency to sneak up on you rather than trumpet its arrival. The first page of her new book Not a Novel starts wi …
Classical home listening: lockdown discs from Igor Levit, Daumants Liepiņš and Bayreuth • Every recording from Igor Levit, the Russian-born, Berlin-based pianist, is an event (in fact this “event’ was launched in September but thanks to C …
The week in classical: Live from London Christmas; Louis Andriessen premiere – review Amid the blizzard of images crazing our senses this year, one stood out last week: an elite choral ensemble from Oakwood, Alabama – the Aeolians – sin …
Roddy Doyle on writing The Commitments: 'Whenever I needed a name, I used the phonebook' I remember the moment when I came up with the name for the older trumpet player, Joey “The Lips” Fagan; it felt like a good night’s work. I remember s …
Paul McCartney: McCartney III review – light from the bunker The song that closes Paul McCartney’s latest solo album transcribes the to-do list of a man living a simpler life. Foxes are scaring the hens and lamb …
Andrew Weatherall remembered by David Holmes I’ll start by saying that DJing, remixing and producing were just something that Andrew did. I always looked at him as a much bigger presence. Spendin …
Dexter Gordon: Montmartre 1964 review – a genius abroad The American tenor saxophonist Dexter Gordon (1923-90) first came to Europe in 1962 for a two-week gig at Ronnie Scott’s, and decided to stay for a wh …
Country superstar Charley Pride dies aged 86 Summary: The singer Charley Pride, the first black superstar of country music, died on Saturday at the age of 86. His publicist confirmed that Pride died on 12 …
Corona, Climate, Chronic Emergency; What Would Nature Do? – review Do you remember April? It seems like decades ago, but I remember, amid the dread and claustrophobia of lockdown, an unexpected thrum of hope. Traffic …
The best children's books of 2020 for all ages As Covid-19 tightened its grip in March, forcing schools, bookshops and libraries to close, so the children’s book world responded in characteristical …
David Byrne: 'Spike Lee and I have a lot in common' David Byrne is one of popular culture’s great polymaths: a musician, producer, artist, actor, author, record label owner and film-maker. He was a foun …
Tome raiders: solving the great book heist Everything went exactly to plan. Late on the evening of 29 January 2017, Daniel David and Victor Opariuc parked up and made their way towards the Fron …
The Avalanches: We Will Always Love You review – multilayered, blissed-out psychedelia It took Melbourne’s Avalanches 16 years to follow up the dazzling cut-and-paste alchemy of their debut, Since I Left You. When it did finally arrive, …
John le Carré, author of Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy, dies aged 89 John le Carré, who forged thrillers from equal parts of adventure, moral courage and literary flair, has died aged 89. Le Carré explored the gap betwe …
John le Carré obituary John le Carré, who has died aged 89 of pneumonia, raised the spy novel to a new level of seriousness and respect. He was in his late 20s when he began …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 5: Sault – Untitled (Black Is) In a recent essay for Harper’s magazine the author Garth Greenwell wrote about his problem with creating work that is described as “relevant”. He argu …
'Titan of English literature': tributes flow for John le Carré Writers, actors and directors have paid tribute to John le Carré, the acclaimed author of literary spy novels, following his death from pneumonia aged …
A World Beneath the Sands by Toby Wilkinson review – the golden age of Egyptology In 1880, a ship from Alexandria moored off 23rd Street, New York City. On board was an obelisk. Nothing proclaimed imperial might quite like a phallic …
Waves Across the South by Sujit Sivasundaram review – the age of revolutions reconceived In 1826, crowds poured into the Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly to gape at a spoil of war: a Burmese imperial carriage, nearly 14ft long, its spokes silve …
John le Carré remembered by writers and friends: 'He always had a naughty twinkle in the eye' John Banville, author We met for lunch one rainy day at the end of last summer, in an excellent but eerily deserted restaurant in Hampstead village. H …
Jesy Nelson leaves Little Mix to focus on mental health Summary: Jesy Nelson has quit Little Mix, the UK pop quartet who have topped the British singles chart four times since forming on The X Factor in 2011. Announ …
Will Young tells inquest: caring for my brother became too much Will Young has described how years spent caring for his twin brother, who struggled with depression and addiction, became too much and he eventually f …
The 50  best albums of 2020, No 4: Perfume Genius – Set My Heart on Fire Immediately Every Perfume Genius album marks some kind of transition. When singer Mike Hadreas released his 2010 debut, the intimate, introspective Learning, he e …
Earliest known Church of England hymn by female composer found Summary: Another jigsaw piece in the history of female composers has been slotted into place with the discovery of the earliest known Church of England anthem …
Jesy Nelson: abuse has cruelly silenced one of pop's few unfiltered voices I first interviewed Little Mix in 2012, not long after they’d won The X Factor, the first girl band to do so. At that point they had one song to their …
'All they want is my voice': the real story of 'Mother of the Blues'  Ma Rainey When Florene Dawkins helped come to the rescue of a house that once belonged to Ma Rainey, the “Mother of the Blues”, it was boarded up, frequented by …
Readers on their favourite books of 2020: 'I’ve given it to everyone I know' Summary: Caste by Isabel Wilkerson In Caste, Wilkerson explains why racism thrives and not just thrives, but is actively institutionalised and why white privil …
Charley Pride obituary Summary: A fine baritone voice and friendly, graceful manner ensured that Charley Pride, who has died at the age of 86 from complications related to Covid-19, …
Wollstonecraft by Sylvana Tomaselli review – trailblazing feminist Summary: Reflecting on her career two years before her premature death, Mary Wollstonecraft described herself as one of those who serve as “sign-posts, which p …
'It’s been a rollercoaster': how indie publishers survived - and thrived - in 2020 Six months ago, independent publishers Jacaranda and Knights Of were warning publicly that their income had fallen to almost zero. They weren’t the on …
Elizabeth Wurtzel remembered by Nancy Jo Sales My daughter had a dream about our friend Elizabeth Wurtzel the other night. Dreams about someone who has died are not uncommon, as we know. Some say i …
Simone de Beauvoir's 'remarkable' letters to Violette Leduc sold at auction Almost 300 letters, mostly unpublished, from the influential feminist thinker Simone de Beauvoir to the French novelist Violette Leduc, including The …
Let the music play: classical music and opera in 2020 When I left the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London after Pierre-Laurent Aimard’s recital on 10 March, I little imagined that it would be the last “normal” …
Brendan Lehane obituary My friend Brendan Lehane, who has died aged 84, was a journalist and author who wrote about the history and natural history of Ireland. Brendan was on …
Match made in heaven? Why Taylor Swift is a Brazilian football team’s unofficial mascot Name: The Taylor Swift Rule. Age: 14. Appearance: Like hundreds of thousands of screaming Brazilians. Oh no, she is not culturally appropriating again …
Kate Grenville, Sofie Laguna, Julia Baird and others: the 20 best Australian books of 2020 1. Lucky’s by Andrew Pippos Picador This novel is a saga in the truest definition of that word, spanning more than 50 years of one Greek-Australian fa …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 2: Dua Lipa – Future Nostalgia For Dua Lipa, 2020 began with a puddle of tears and it ended the same way. When her second album leaked in April, the singer sobbed her way through an …
Not a wonderful world: why Louis Armstrong was hated by so many “I cannot think of another American artist who so failed his own talent. What went wrong?” asked one biographer of Louis Armstrong. “The sheer weight …
Paperchase removes card with orphan joke after protest from Lemn Sissay Summary: Paperchase has removed a card that mocked foster children from sale after the award-winning poet Lemn Sissay accused the chain of “punching down” and …
Alanna Knight obituary The popular novelist and crime writer Alanna Knight, who has died aged 97, had a career that extended over 50 years and encompassed more than 60 books …
Pop in 2020: an escape into disco, folklore and nostalgia Pop music has the ability to be more reactive to current events than ever. Advances in technology mean that the famously swift musical responses of ro …
Fiona Apple on the album of the year, Grammys hypocrisy and how #MeToo helped her get sober Summary: The album has meant so much to people this year. Did you know you had made something extraordinary? Did finishing it feel different to finishing other …
Guardian albums and tracks of 2020: how our writers voted Here’s how our writers voted: favourite choice first. Alexis Petridis, head pop and rock critic Albums Sault – Untitled (Rise) Sault – Untitled (Black …
Collected Stories by Shirley Hazzard review – trials of love and war There is, Shirley Hazzard fans will know, something sublime in hearing the perfect truth, no matter how bad it is. As a child during the second world …
The 50 best albums of 2020: the full list This list is drawn from votes by Guardian music critics – each critic votes for their top 20 albums, with points allocated for each placing, and those …
Paul McCartney expects Glastonbury 2021 to be cancelled Summary: Paul McCartney, this year’s would-be Glastonbury headliner, does not expect the festival to go ahead in 2021. The former Beatles star told BBC Radio 4 …
Chris Packham: ‘I read Brave New World at 13 – I found it terrifying but empowering' Summary: The book I am currently reading I’ve just finished Dale Vince’s Manifesto. He’s the person behind green energy company Ecotricity, and he’s keen to en …
David Constantine wins Queen's gold medal for poetry The Queen’s gold medal for poetry has been awarded to David Constantine, a “long overdue” prize for a writer praised by the poet laureate, Simon Armit …
Chinese tech firm increases stake in Universal Music to 20% The Chinese technology company Tencent has doubled its stake in Universal Music to 20% as the streaming boom drives the world’s largest music company …
Classical highlights: concerts and operas to stream this Christmas Royal Opera House Christmas Concert Conducted by Mark Wigglesworth and introduced by Roderick Williams, the ROH presents a selection of numbers from f …
Bookish fun on TV and radio to enjoy this Christmas Remember when it was a treat that everything was shut, people were hunkered down at home, and slumping in front of the TV was a nice change? Ah well. …
A Tomb With a View by Peter Ross review – the glory of graveyards On 20 March 2014, two women were walking through Glasnevin cemetery in Dublin after visiting the grave of a family friend when they found the body of …
The Bookseller's Tale by Martin Latham review – a literary celebration What most people know about the American librarian Melvil Dewey is his phenomenal classification technique, the Dewey decimal system, which is still u …
Adam Kay: 'We should talk to kids about sex and alcohol. Everything goes wrong when people close up' Adam Kay is pleased with the title of his new book, Kay’s Anatomy, but he acknowledges that it’s not a joke his target audience is likely to snigger a …
The week in classical: Fidelio; Così fan tutte; Owen Wingrave; Cinderella and more Beethoven’s 250th birthday finally arrived last week. We shouldn’t mind, for his sake, that so many brilliantly planned celebrations worldwide had to …
Gorillaz: Song Machine Live from Kong review – a genre-straddling success story Little about 2020 has been straightforward. So there is something perversely logical in the prospect of Gorillaz – a half-real, half-virtual band who …
Kindred by Rebecca Wragg Sykes review – a new understanding of humanity Homo sapiens’ relationship with our long-lost relatives the Neanderthals has undergone a lot of rethinking since our relatively recent reintroduction …
My perfect Christmas playlist, by Michael Kiwanuka, Sophie Ellis-Bextor and Tim Burgess Summary: Michael Kiwanuka 2020 Mercury prize winner and associate of mysterious band of the year Sault It’s been such a good year for my album, but it feels so …
Royal Opera Christmas concert review – pandemic pyjama party around the tree Curious though it may seem, the Royal Opera staged a pyjama party for its Christmas concert, the stream of which went ahead as scheduled, though tier …
Jack Harlow: That's What They All Say review – breezy confessionals Summary: Kentucky’s Jack Harlow is one of the most hyped new rappers of this year, with a No 2 single and a Grammy nod for the same song, Whats Poppin. He’s al …
Katy: a short story by Bryan Washington The ask felt abrupt. Noah told me – over a text, our first in years – that he and his mother were reopening their bakery, but then he asked if I could …
The cosiest comfort reads to curl up with this Christmas Even if you feel you have had more “curling up quietly at home” time than is strictly necessary this year, finding a good Christmas read is still an e …
The 10 best jazz albums of 2020 10 Pat Metheny – From This Place Being both a bestselling jazz-fusion superstar and an experimental collaborator with John Zorn and Ornette Coleman ta …
Poem of the week: Towards the End of the Feast by Andrew Greig Towards the End of the Feast The best way to bear that flaming pud signalling the latter stages of our feast is not Kenneth McKellar’s rictus grin nor …
'It speaks to an ancient history': why South Africa has the world's most exciting dance music Many people got their first taste of South African dance music this year via six Angolans dancing in their backyard, dinner plates in hand. Their vira …
Pioneering fairytale author Madame d'Aulnoy back in print after centuries Summary: A story by Madame d’Aulnoy, the 17th-century French writer who coined the term “fairytales”, is to be published in English for the first time in more …
Can a trippy VR film bring classical music to a new generation? Summary: The two huge white trailers that sit between the Royal Palace and the Royal theatre in central Madrid form an unlikely pair of portals to a universe o …
The Knowledge Machine by Michael Strevens review – how science works Isaac Newton had a problem. He didn’t believe in the divinity of Christ. Scriptural study had convinced him that Jesus was not equal to but created by …
Children of Ash and Elm by Neil Price review – the Vikings on their own terms Scholars, like Vikings, can be a belligerent crowd. As Neil Price notes in the opening pages of Children of Ash and Elm, the field of Viking studies i …
The 10 best folk albums of 2020 10. Wu Fei and Abigail Washburn – Wu Fei and Abigail Washburn Behold the Banjo Guzheng Pickin’ Girls, as goes the title of one the many joyous collabo …
Lawsuit over 'warmer' Sherlock depicted in Enola Holmes dismissed The estate of Arthur Conan Doyle and Netflix have agreed to dismiss a lawsuit brought by the author’s estate, which alleged that the film Enola Holmes …
Richard Osman becomes first debut author to land Christmas No 1 Richard Osman’s cosy mystery about a group of elderly sleuths, The Thursday Murder Club, has become the first debut novel ever to become the Christmas …
The True History of the First Mrs Meredith  review –  no longer hidden Fifty years ago biography wasn’t much interested in people like Mary Ellen Peacock Meredith. Her life was deemed “lesser”, although of course it didn’ …
The Sound Mirror by Heidi James review  – an exceptional, intimate voice Tamara is on her way to kill her mother and she’s bringing her female ancestors with her, a Greek chorus consisting of “fragments, un-unified, unstabl …
The 10 best global albums of 2020 10 Aquiles Navarro and Tcheser Holmes – Heritage of the Invisible II This is a heavy record in every sense. Aquiles Navarro’s synths are so guttural t …
Top 10 Christmas crime stories There is a yearly argument – online if nowhere else – as to whether Die Hard, the Bruce-Willis-versus-European-baddies action flick from 1988, is a Ch …
Alan Bennett’s 2020 diary reveals growing health struggles Alan Bennett’s annual chronicling of his life for the London Review of Books this year reveals the beloved author in worsening health as he confronts …
Paradise: Dante's Divine Trilogy Part Three by Alasdair Gray review – a fitting finale Alasdair Gray, the great Scottish novelist and artist, died a year ago, in December 2019. In his biography of Gray, A Secretary’s Biography (2008) – t …
The 10 best contemporary music albums of 2020 10 Brandee Younger and Dezron Douglas – Force Majeure Recorded during lockdown in the couple’s New York apartment, Force Majeure (named after the smal …
This Christmas, read a story aloud - you'll be surprised by the joy it brings Summary: As this year of illness, lockdown and loneliness heads towards its bitter end, finding ways to keep connected and our spirits buoyed is crucial. This …
She Come by It Natural; Dolly Parton, Songteller review – no Dumb Blonde In 1977, Dolly Parton was interviewed by Barbara Walters in a TV special. The singer was 31 and, having not long extricated herself from a professiona …
The best songs of 2020 ... that you didn't hear Summary: Lily Kershaw ft Goody Grace – Now & Then I first heard Now & Then performed in a living room by a piano on a hot evening in the summer of 2019 when th …
Luster by Raven Leilani review – a debut of exceptional power Writers treat language in different ways. Some step over it to serve a plot, the electric possibilities of the words themselves kept in check or indee …
The week in classical: AAM: Messiah; Krystian Zimerman, LSO/Rattle review – great conjunctions Aside from political tumult, this winter solstice we witnessed a rare “great conjunction” in the skies. Finding a Messiah should have been a cinch. We …
Steve Earle and the Dukes: JT review – a father's fond farewell “It’s the only way I knew to say goodbye,” says Steve Earle of this album honouring his late son, Justin Townes Earle, a talented singer-songwriter fr …
Classical music: Fiona Maddocks's 10 best of 2020 1. Igor Levit’s livestreamed house concerts March-May In an empty room, often in socks or slippers, the Russian-born pianist’s spontaneous response to …
Fleet Foxes: A Very Lonely Solstice live stream review – all is balm Summary: Despite its billing – “a very lonely solstice” – this live stream doesn’t start lonely at all. Dressed all in white, a masked, socially distanced choi …
Ruth Bader Ginsburg: The Last Interview and Other Conversations – review When Ruth Bader Ginsburg graduated from law school in 1959, women made up 3% of lawyers in the US and there were no women judges on the federal courts …
‘I’m more optimistic’: poet laureate Simon Armitage tells of Britain’s great ordeal How to tell millions of individual stories? Or represent the pain and anxiety of a pandemic to audiences of the future? Perhaps it takes a national po …
Music: Kitty Empire's 10 best of 2020 1. A Swayze and the Ghosts: Paid Salvation Ivy League; September The antidote to 2020 bar none: 12 tracks of guaranteed instant uplift from a bunch of …
Nonfiction to look out for in 2021 Publishing can feel slow, even stately, at times, and not only because good books take a long time to write. But in 2021, speed will be the order of t …
Fiction to look out for in 2021 2020 ended up being a decent year for the publishing trade, at least as far as book sales went. Perhaps we also learned to cherish our bookshops and l …
Feed your soul: the 31-day literary diet for January Summary: Our revels now are ended and January looms, with its exhortations to get fit, lose weight, dry out. So here’s a radical alternative diet: instead of d …
Leslie West obituary Leslie West, who has died aged 75 following a cardiac arrest, could claim to be one of the creators of heavy metal. His band Mountain made a spectacul …
Wonder breaks the silence: pop, rock and classical music for 2021 Sleaford Mods – Spare Ribs The title of Sleaford Mods’ sixth album is apparently an oblique reference to the fatalities in the first wave of coronavir …
Poem of the week: To Tartar, a Terrier Beauty by Thomas Lovell Beddoes Sonnet: To Tartar, a Terrier Beauty Snowdrop of dogs, with ear of brownest dye, Like the last orphan leaf of naked tree Which shudders in bleak autumn …
Back to Black: how the music industry reckoned with race this year “In the wake of George Floyd” is a sentence I have both read and written too many times this year. His brutal and racist killing forced an elevated co …
The Death of Francis Bacon by Max Porter review – last rites for a great artist Summary: The facts of the death of Francis Bacon were these: in April 1992, the artist, against his doctor’s advice, took a trip to Madrid to visit his last gr …
Armando Manzanero, acclaimed Mexican music star, dies aged 85 of Covid Armando Manzanero, one of Mexico’s most revered songwriters and musical performers, has died aged 85 from Covid-19. He tested positive for the disease …
Having and Being Had by Eula Biss review – saturated in capitalism As a writer Eula Biss has two great gifts. The first is her ability to reveal to the reader what has, all along, been hidden in plain sight. She did t …
'Audiences don't want white anger': how white rap grew a conscience With Jack Harlow’s major label debut Thats What They All Say selling strongly alongside a bumper deluxe version of Eminem’s Music to be Murdered By, w …
Beginners by Tom Vanderbilt review – it's never too late to learn Most highly skilled fields have rude names for beginners. In surfing you’re a “kook”, in chess a “patzer”, in competitive cycling a “Fred” and in the …
'Humaning': a nice idea or ridiculous corporate buzzword? In business news, Mondelēz International, a multinational food company that owns Cadbury among others, recently announced that its new marketing strat …
Banging toons: why bands such as Bis are making soundtracks for kids' TV An architect cranks a lever, and suddenly Mr Salmonelli’s Leaning Tower of Pizza restaurant lurches to an angle. As pots and pans fly, a band slide in …
Little Scratch by Rebecca Watson review - a daringly experimental debut Rebecca Watson’s debut novel started life as a piece that was shortlisted for the White Review story prize in 2018; in it, we follow the narrator’s th …
'All that mattered was survival': the songs that got us through 2020 Isaac Hayes – Going in Circles When it came to lockdown comfort listening, there was something particularly appealing about lush symphonic soul made b …
MF Doom, iconic masked hip-hop MC, dies aged 49 MF Doom, one of US hip-hop’s most distinctive and respected MCs and producers, has died aged 49. His wife Jasmine posted on his Instagram account: The …
