Mariah Carey's Twitter account hacked on New Year's Eve Mariah Carey’s Twitter account appeared to have been hacked late Tuesday afternoon, sharing numerous racist slurs and comments with the singer’s 21.4 …
War epics, airmen and young Sopranos: essential films for 2020 1917 An epic of Lean-ian proportions is delivered in this spectacular from director and co-writer Sam Mendes, who has developed a real-life story of h …
The most exciting movies of 2020 – horror The Grudge A belated English language reboot of Japanese classic Ju-On: The Grudge (2002), this stars Andrea Riseborough and Demián Bichir as detectiv …
Woodford folk festival review – a much-needed moment of positivity and reprieve If Woodford folk festival was in mourning this year, you wouldn’t have known it. The death in May of festival elder and decade-long patron Bob Hawke c …
In the Line of Duty review – race-against-time cop thriller There’s a straight-to-video feel to this cop thriller, directed by action veteran Steven C Miller, written by Jeremy Drysdale (who scripted the indie …
We Are from Jazz review – zany Russian musical comedy Only in a Woody Allen film will you hear quite as much Dixieland jazz as this. Here is We Are from Jazz, or We Are Jazzmen, the zany jazz comedy music …
Tara Erraught/James Baillieu review – quietly intense and simply exquisite Irish mezzo Tara Erraught’s latest Wigmore recital with her pianist James Baillieu took place between Christmas and New Year, though her beautifully c …
First transgender Marvel superhero coming 'very soon' The first transgender character in a Marvel movie will probably appear in a film released next year. Speaking at an event at the New York Film Academy …
All Federico Fellini's films – ranked! 20. The Voice of the Moon (1990) A gentle, episodic Fellini, with Roberto Benigni playing Ivo, a madcap character who travels far and wide across the …
Sharon Choi: how we fell for Bong Joon-ho's translator Just when you thought Bong Joon-ho – the affable maestro of Korean cinema and now, with his class-conscious Cannes winner Parasite, champion of the pe …
The most exciting movies of 2020 – biopics Respect Having wiped away her Catstoddler snot, Jennifer Hudson gives her pipes a wider airing in this Aretha Franklin biopic which – unlike other mov …
More women than ever working in film – but men still dominate key roles The number of women working in the film industry reached a historic high in 2019, but men still outnumber women four to one in key roles. Women made u …
'Do something weird that works on TikTok': how to write a pop smash in 2020 Landing a No 1 single was a little different at the beginning of the 2010s than it is now. The songwriting and production team TMS – who have achieved …
Golden Globes 2020: stars prepare for the return of Ricky Gervais Summary: Stars such as Jennifer Aniston, Jennifer Lopez and Adam Driver will be battling it out for Golden Globes this weekend as the year’s first awards show …
'Maybe I'm taking things too far': Trey Edward Shults on mining his family's trauma In 2013, the director Trey Edward Shults got a call from a hospital in Missouri; his father was dying of pancreatic cancer. They hadn’t spoken in a de …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Raye, Usher, Lil Uzi Vert Raye Please Don’t Touch You heard it here first: London pop star Rachel Keen, AKA Raye, is the artist most likely to “do a Dua” in 2020 and make the l …
Lost in muzak: how ambient became cool When Wire, a nightclub in Leeds city centre, recently announced its first residency, it came with a calm-inducing addition: ambient listening sessions …
Ricky Gervais isn't the Golden Globes host we want – but the one we deserve Ricky Gervais should not host the Golden Globes this year. He has said as much himself, again and again and again. The first time he was apparently go …
Golden Globes: who will win and who should win the film awards? Summary: Best film (drama) The best film category is dominated – just like everything else in the cultural conversation around movies – by Netflix, which has t …
Mystery of Rolling Stones tracks posted briefly on YouTube A mysterious YouTube account that posted, then hid, a collection of 75 rare and unpublished Rolling Stones recordings may have been a canny attempt to …
The most exciting movies of 2020 – foreign language The Whistlers A bent detective becomes entangled in the crimes he’s investigating in Corneliu Porumboiu’s nifty, twisty drama. This one premiered at C …
Forget Cats: in a close-run field, Marriage Story was the musical highlight of my holiday Summary: So, apparently there was lots of good TV on over the holiday break. Some book adaptations, perhaps? Maybe a sexed-up period drama? Alas, I missed it a …
The Gentlemen review – Guy Ritchie’s dated gangster romp Guy Ritchie’s latest gangster comedy presents itself as a harmless romp, but behind its wink-wink-nudge-nudge humour is a bitter and dated worldview. …
Terry Gilliam faces backlash after labeling #MeToo a 'witch-hunt' The director Terry Gilliam has invited renewed backlash after repeating his claim that he is a “black lesbian in transition”, assailing the #MeToo mov …
Amanda review – muted Paris terror attack drama This tasteful, muted exploration of personal trauma imagines the aftermath of a fictional terrorist attack in modern-day Paris, presumably inspired by …
From Scorsese to The Crown, Netflix gets set for Golden Globes glory Summary: Betting odds predict the loudest sounds of cheering and popping corks in Los Angeles on Sunday night will come from inside the Beverly Hilton Hotel. F …
Pavel Kolesnikov review – an outstanding pianist in every degree Dusk to Dawn was the title of Pavel Kolesnikov‘s latest Wigmore recital, a superb, wonderfully programmed evening that more than confirmed the London- …
Paolo Sorrentino: ‘My characters’ struggles are the struggles I have’ The Naples-born director and screenwriter Paolo Sorrentino had his first screenplay made when he was in his 20s, and has since written and directed ni …
Russell Crowe and Cate Blanchett use Golden Globes speeches to link Australian fires to climate crisis Russell Crowe and Cate Blanchett have used their Golden Globes speeches to highlight Australia’s bushfire crisis, and the link between climate change …
Golden Globes 2020: British winners soar as Ricky Gervais crashes – as it happened It was a rather lacklustre night at the Globes, a shame for a star-packed ceremony that can often be rather loose and fun, despite some wacky choices. …
Nicola Roberts: ‘My therapist said I was one of the most resilient people she’d ever met’ Last year was one of the happiest of Nicola Roberts’ life. She signed off on the repossession of her home in Surrey and moved to London, close to frie …
Apocalypse now-ish: what can we learn from films set in 2020? 2019 and 2020 may only be separated by a year, but linguistically, they’re much farther apart. The words “two thousand and nineteen” just don’t have t …
1917's Golden Globes glory fair reward for thrilling and distinguished work The Golden Globes were making the familiar series of safe commercial bets, of course, but there were some great movies being distinguished, too, and t …
Ricky Gervais is wrong: political engagement at the Golden Globes was essential “You know nothing about the real world,” Ricky Gervais told the audience at Sunday night’s Golden Globe awards. “Most of you spent less time in school …
Peace in our time: why 'pacifist war movies' such as 1917 are on the march War movies used to celebrate military leaders (George C Scott’s Patton, Lawrence of Arabia) or courageous crack squads (The Dambusters, The Dirty Doze …
Nirvana reunion: Dave Grohl's 13-year-old daughter steals the show Summary: When arts charity the Art of Elysium announced the lineup for its annual Heaven Is Rock and Roll Gala in Los Angeles, the attention was on the second …
The biggest Golden Globes snubs on a night of surprises Netflix stumbles at final hurdle Before the Globes, Hollywood was readying the knee cushions as it prepared to genuflect before the streaming giant, w …
Why Michelle Williams is the real winner of this year's Golden Globes Everyone knows that it’s not only what you win or who you wear that counts at an awards ceremony – it’s what you say. And were there a prize for most …
Let it Go! Why the mayor of Hallstatt is telling Frozen fans to stay away Name: Hallstatt, Austria. Age: Archaeology suggests the area has been settled for about 3,000 years. Appearance: Like a fairytale alpine village, but …
Lizzo's Sydney Opera House performance was as close to transcendent as pop can get Summary: The floor rumbles as more than 2,000 people stamp their feet, raise their arms and bow down in unison as they chant the name “Lizzo”. I find myself wi …
Baftas 2020: British film awards on back foot after diversity row The British Academy of Film and Television Arts (Bafta) are on the back foot after incurring heavy criticism over the lack of diversity in their nomin …
The full list of nominations for the Baftas 2020 Summary: Best film 1917 The Irishman Joker Once Upon a Time in Hollywood Parasite Best British film 1917 Bait For Sama Rocketman Sorry We Missed You The Two Po …
Hans Zimmer hired to score Bond film No Time to Die at last minute Hans Zimmer has been drafted in as a last-minute replacement to score the James Bond movie No Time to Die, less than three months before its release. …
Colossally overrated Joker beneficiary of Bafta awards groupthink The Bafta nominations have been announced and the list contains an innovation for which insiders have been calling for years: a new category for casti …
Deadly charms: can Kit Harington survive Marvel's The Eternals? Almost nothing is known about The Eternals, Marvel’s first real jump into post-Endgame storytelling. We know that it’ll star Angelina Jolie, Richard M …
Letter: Julian Piper obituary In 1998 Julian Piper invited us to go and interview the American blues guitarist Phil Guy, who was staying with him at his home in Topsham, Devon. Phi …
'Most terrifying experience of my life': Cats viewers on seeing the film on drugs Readers of the Washington Post have found a way to watch Cats, the big-screen adaptation of the famous musical that’s reckoned to have lost more than …
Underwater review – Kristen Stewart's soggy, silly monster movie Diving into the January release schedule, unofficial dumping ground of studios, can give one a sinking feeling here in the US. After being spoiled by …
Doors drummer John Densmore: ‘It took me years to forgive Jim Morrison’ It took the Doors’ drummer, John Densmore, three years to visit the grave of his bandmate Jim Morrison after he was found dead in a Paris bathtub in 1 …
Musical notes: Justin Bieber's TikTok-friendly Yummy is too eager to go viral Summary: Pop and rock music, in its multifarious forms, seems to shift faster than ever. In 2020, we’re bombarded not just with music – more of which is readil …
Part dinosaur, part Mars bar … it's the Avatar-inspired Mercedes-Benz! Avatar superfans have had it rough this last decade. With the sequels to the 2009 movie delayed time and time again, they’ve had vanishingly few oppor …
Stephen Hough/Castalian Quartet review – ensemble and balance were spot-on Stephen Hough’s three-concert residency at the Wigmore Hall this week is built around chamber works by Brahms. Its centrepiece was a programme of two …
The Runaways review – a bumpy escape … by donkey One or two nice moments in this British family adventure drama, a feature debut written and directed by the TV documentary-maker Richard Heap. But it …
UK drill rapper Headie One jailed for six months for carrying knife Headie One, the Tottenham rapper who has had chart success with Stormzy and Dave, has been sentenced to six months in prison for carrying a knife. The …
Record high in Hollywood films with female lead characters Summary: In what is likely to be seen as a boost for Hollywood’s drive to redress decades of male dominance on screen, a new report suggests that a record perc …
Real-life inspiration for stripper drama Hustlers sues film's producers for $40m Samantha Barbash, the former stripper who inspired Jennifer Lopez’s character in the hit drama Hustlers, is suing the companies behind the film for $4 …
Lullaby review – bad-nanny thriller up past its bedtime If a young couple hire an apparently perfect nanny to look after their two young children, allowing them to return to the carefree world of socialisin …
Peter Wollen obituary Summary: Peter Wollen, who has died aged 81 after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease, did much to launch film studies in the UK and US. In 1967 the pioneering …
Wiley v Stormzy: sparks fly in grime's generation game For many of us, January is a time to reset, exercise, and get mind and body in order for the start of a new year. But someone who clearly hasn’t downl …
Can Joaquin Phoenix save the planet by wearing one tuxedo for the whole awards season? At last some good news for the planet: in conjunction with a general plea for sustainability, Joker star Joaquin Phoenix has vowed to re-purpose his G …
Oscars ceremony will be hostless for second year running This year’s Oscars ceremony will be without a traditional host for the second year running, according to the ABC entertainment president, Karey Burke. …
Instead of celebrating Adele's weight loss, may I suggest something else? Adele may have dubious views on tax, but one thing is for certain: the rest of her resume is nearly flawless. Her first album, some of which she wrote …
The New Mutants: what should we expect from the cursed X-Men horror film? The X-Men horror The New Mutants has had quite the mutated journey to the screen: several scrapped release dates, abandoned reshoots, a new character …
Uncut Gems review – this sparkler will be the most exciting film of the year This sensationally good New York crime drama is rocket-fuelled with greed and crack-fumed with fear. It is directed by the Safdie brothers, Benny and …
Two new David Bowie records to be released in 2020 Two new David Bowie records will be released this year, with a digital EP featuring unheard versions of songs being released weekly and a live session …
For your consideration: this season's most overlooked film performances Academy awards voting opened last week, and runs for just six days: the shortest period of balloting ever, characteristic of a squeezed season that wi …
The Clash's 40 greatest songs – ranked! 40. 1977 (1977) A historical artefact, not for the proto-punk music, but because the lyrics epitomise the new wave’s perceived threat to the old guard …
Georgia: Seeking Thrills review – a bold British hymn to hedonism The photo on the cover of Georgia Barnes’s second album seems telling. At first glance, it looks like one of those classic late 80s/early 90s club sho …
Brazilian judge orders Netflix to remove 'gay Jesus' comedy A Brazilian judge on Wednesday ordered Netflix to stop showing a Christmas special that some called blasphemous for depicting Jesus as a gay man and w …
Buck Henry: the master of despair whose comedies seduced Hollywood The language of American comedy would have been a lot less sparky without Buck Henry, who has died aged 89. He helped shape one of the most revolution …
El Topo review – Jodorowsky's weird world of occult psychedelia Now 90 and still a vigorously engaged public figure, the midnight-movie magus, comic-book artist and tarot enthusiast Alejandro Jodorowsky has become …
Beethoven: The Late Quartets review – serene and assured performances Summary: The Brodsky Quartet have taken their time over the Beethoven quartets. In 2006, they released a disc of two of the Rasumovsky quartets, Opp 59 Nos 2 a …
Vegan food, recycled tuxedos – and billions of tonnes of CO2: can Hollywood ever go green? Summary: Two schools of thought regarding Hollywood environmentalism were on display at last weekend’s Golden Globes ceremony. In the blue corner were those de …
Keeley Forsyth: how the Happy Valley actor became the new Scott Walker Yorkshire is the backdrop to many disquieting works of art, such as David Peace’s Red Riding Quartet, Bram Stoker’s Dracula and the Brontës’ explorati …
Bafta to review voting system after diversity row The British Academy of Film and Television Arts (Bafta) is reviewing its voting process after criticism over the lack of female directors or black and …
Marianne Crebassa/Fazıl Say review – singer and pianist in creative harmony A standard vocal recital has the singer stealing the limelight from an all too often anonymous pianist, and the repertoire lightening up towards the e …
Harry Kupfer obituary Harry Kupfer, who has died aged 84, was a towering figure in opera production with a career spanning 60 years. A native of Berlin, for the first two d …
DaBaby boom: meet the controversial rapper taking over America It’s impossible to know where to focus your attention. On the six members of Jabbawockeez, the dance troupe wriggling on stage like breakdancing storm …
David Lang: why I freed Fidelio's other prisoners I was in my early 20s when I first saw Fidelio, Beethoven’s only opera, on stage. I didn’t know that much about it. I knew the rough plot – a woman, L …
Is Kristen Stewart too good for big-budget blockbusters? Summary: There are two sorts of movie stars, and the demands of the market are such that the first type must occasionally pretend to be the second type. The fi …
Failure to launch: why Bombshell doesn't hit its right-wing targets You won’t see adverts for Bombshell on the Fox News network, which is both unsurprising and part of the problem. Bombshell details the toxic regime of …
The Big Moon: Walking Like We Do review – endlessly quotable indie-pop Endearing indie outfits announcing that they’re going pop is rarely cause for celebration. The sense that they feel strong-armed into it by commercial …
Emilio Estevez: ‘Brat Pack will be on my tombstone’ Unlike his father and his brother, Emilio Estevez never changed his name. Ramon Estevez became Martin Sheen and Carlos Estevez is better known as Char …
Poppy: I Disagree review – online pop-bot embraces IRL nu-metal Moriah Pereira, AKA Poppy, emerged in 2014 as a YouTube sensation, pitched as a fictional character: a video of her eating candy floss garnered over t …
Field Music: Making a New World review – war stories with disco-pop sensibilities Summary: This 40-minute, 19-song cycle about the aftermath of the first world war isn’t the most obvious commercial follow-up to Field Music’s glorious 2018 To …
Beatles' Abbey Road tops US bestselling vinyl LPs of the 2010s The Beatles’ 1969 album Abbey Road has been named the US’s biggest-selling vinyl LP of the 2010s, shifting more than 558,000 copies. The Top 10, compi …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Justin Bieber, Travis Scott, Hatsune Miku Summary: Justin Bieber Yummy There’s something about one-time child stars named Justin that makes them incapable of getting married without releasing at least …
Gift of the gabber: the return of dance music’s gloriously tasteless subgenre Summary: “Strictly for the headstrong!” bellowed the rave MCs back in 92. In contrast to the smiles and hugs of acid house, the music, the dancing, the drugs w …
Before 1917: revisiting the greatest first world war movies About 35 minutes into Peter Weir’s Gallipoli, Archy (Mark Lee) and Frank (Mel Gibson), two champion-level sprinters from Australia, are trudging their …
Czech new wave director Ivan Passer dies aged 86 Ivan Passer, the film-maker who was a key figure in the Czech new wave and who went on to direct the thriller Cutter’s Way after emigrating to the US, …
Rush drummer and lyricist Neil Peart dies at 67 The Rush drummer and lyricist Neil Peart has died at the age of 67. The Canadian musician had been diagnosed with brain cancer three years ago and die …
Rush's Neil Peart: unassuming, thunderous drummer who became a music legend “He was one of the goofiest-looking guys I’d ever seen,” Geddy Lee told me in November 2018. Rush’s singer and bass player was talking about his first …
Mura Masa: the Stormzy collaborator on why he’s swapped sunny pop for moody nostalgia In a cramped south London rehearsal space, producer Mura Masa, AKA Alex Crossan, is quietly losing the plot. Takeaway boxes and empty bottles rest on …
The week in classical: NYO/Martín; Stephen Hough review – a flying start to 2020 The classical music world wakes slowly in January. Orchestral concerts don’t get going properly until mid-month and most halls are quiet, a noble, ope …
Georgia: Seeking Thrills review – thrills without the spills Summary: On paper, Seeking Thrills, the second album by London producer and vocalist Georgia Barnes, has all the makings of a very Veganuary sort of dance-pop …
Uncut Gems review – an exhilarating, full-blown assault of a movie Watching the flayed-nerve onslaught that is Uncut Gems for the second time, it occurred to me that Josh and Benny Safdie are working with an entirely …
Sulzmann/ Iles/ Holland: Lush Life review – a joyous meeting of minds There’s a rare unanimity of thought when saxophonist Stan Sulzmann and pianist Nikki Iles play together. The way they latch on to one another’s ideas …
Brit award nominations 2020: Dave and Lewis Capaldi top pile, with women shut out The British music industry’s focus on the male solo artist at the expense of female musicians has been thrown into sharp relief by the nominations for …
This year's male-dominated Brit awards have an issue with women You could say this year’s Brit nominations are as predictable as ever. It didn’t take astonishing powers of clairvoyance to predict that Lewis Capaldi …
The Big Moon: Walking Like We Do review – indie crew grow their sound There was certainly no shortage of competent and unimaginative indie rock in the late 2010s. But the debut album by the Big Moon – 2017’s Love in the …
My Oscar goes to... our film critics reveal their personal shortlists Mark Kermode Best picture – my shortlist (favourite first) • PARASITE • Monos • Rocketman • For Sama • Little Women Many of my favourite films of 2019 …
Seberg review – Kristen Stewart outshines flat script Based on the real-life targeted campaign of intimidation by the FBI against the American actress Jean Seberg, this portrait of a woman pushed to break …
Field Music: Making a New World review – a concept stronger than the songs A concept album viewing the last century through the filter of the first world war, Field Music’s seventh album was initially composed and performed b …
Hatsune Miku review – hologram star fires up crowdsourced power pop On Saturday night, a singer with a 13-year career played only her second London headline show. Naturally, the venue was packed out with rapt, merchand …
Himalayan headbangers: in the moshpit with the metalheads of Kathmandu When Ugra Karma made the first-ever Nepali metal recording, they didn’t intend to start a subculture. They just wanted to make life easier for themsel …
Neil Peart obituary The drummer Neil Peart, who has died aged 67 of brain cancer, enjoyed such a reputation for his deft, powerful drumming with the Canadian rock band Ru …
Letter: Paul Birkbeck obituary The artist Paul Birkbeck was also interested in American roots music. During the mid-1960s he played the banjo with the Dedicated Men Jugband. Their r …
Buck Henry obituary The actor and screenwriter Buck Henry, who has died aged 89 of a heart attack, was rarely seen without a baseball cap and a deadpan expression; he loo …
Vijay Iyer: Ritual Ensemble review – thrilling curveballs from Harvard's best Vijay Iyer introduced the Ritual Ensemble’s concert in his Wigmore Hall composer-in-residence series by observing: “We all have an affiliation with Ha …
Steve McQueen: lack of diversity could ruin Baftas' credibility Steve McQueen has said the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (Bafta) risks becoming irrelevant, redundant and of no interest or importance u …
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood gets Oscar boost at Critics Choice awards With less than a month to go until the Oscars, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, Quentin Tarantino’s love letter to 1960s Los Angeles, received a timely …
Day6 review – powerpop and positive energy from frenetic k-rockers Summary: Sympathy is extended to Day6 fans who arrive too late to bag a spot at the front of the queue. By 7am on Sunday, 100 determined MyDays – the collectiv …
La Bohème review – exuberant and persuasive revival performed with elan There are Puccini operas that some of us might not miss never seeing again. But La Bohème is incontrovertibly not one of them. One takes a seat for La …
Oscars 2020: shallow Joker squats on top of patchy and infuriating nominations The Oscar nominations arrive, signalling almost the final iteration of that strange awardsthink consensus: at once exasperating and eerie, choices whi …
Taika Waititi says Jojo Rabbit's six Oscar nominations vindicate risks of making 'divisive' film Summary: Taika Waititi, the New Zealand film-maker behind the “anti-hate” Nazi satire Jojo Rabbit, says the movie’s six Oscar nominations have vindicated the r …
James Blunt: how we made You're Beautiful Summary: James Blunt, singer-songwriter I’d been telling my mates that I was going to be a professional musician since I was 14. When I was a captain in the Br …
From Cats to The Goldfinch: Oscarbait movies the Academy shunned in 2020 Summary: Motherless Brooklyn Given a splashy premiere at the Telluride film festival, one of the most discerning of all the fall festivals, early word suggeste …
‘We are not afforded the luxury of being average’: how Waves unpicks the pressures of ‘black excellence’ When Kelvin Harrison Jr, 25, was working on his lead role in Waves, his manager asked him if he wanted to pull out. “There was a fear,” he says, about …
Uncut Gems is so stressful it should come with a panic attack warning Summary: You won’t see a better-made film this year than Uncut Gems, the Safdie brothers’ propulsive new thriller about the street-level misadventures of a pet …
How Alan Partridge helped Come Out Ye Black and Tans top the charts In the streaming age, the first singles charts of the new year are reliably predictable. Out goes the Christmas music; back in flood the familiar face …
Cher Lloyd: ‘After The X Factor, I had to do damage control. I still have to’ Summary: About a year ago, Cher Lloyd was shopping in the Disney Store on Oxford Street when she was approached by a new fan: a middle-aged man who told her th …
Lucian Freud: A Self Portrait review – picturing a titan of British art The latest in the excellent Exhibition on Screen series is pinned to the current Lucian Freud: The Self Portraits show at the Royal Academy, which is …
Uproar after Vince Vaughn shakes Trump’s hand at football game Summary: The actor Vince Vaughn shook Donald Trump’s hand in a private box at a football game on Monday night, a gesture which took seconds. But it caused upro …
James Bond: Billie Eilish to provide No Time to Die theme Billie Eilish will write and sing the theme song to No Time to Die, the 25th film in the James Bond franchise. At 18 years old, she is the youngest mu …
How long can this nonsense of the Oscars failing to nominate female directors go on? Congratulations to those men – I guess? Issa Rae summarised the mixed feelings of many when yet another all-male list of best director Oscar nominatio …
Wang and Capuçon review –  a dazzling display electrifies Chopin and Franck Summary: A pair of stars don’t necessarily make for a great musical duo, but something seems to have clicked for cellist Gautier Capuçon and pianist Yuja Wang. …
Is Billie Eilish too cool for the James Bond franchise? Summary: No Time to Die already has a lot going for it. It’s got an exciting director, a promising trailer and – if it adheres to the good/bad/good/bad pattern …
Anna Calvi: live music venues deserve as much help as ballet or opera Summary: Britain’s independent music venues should receive the same reverence and support as the ballet or opera, according to the musician Anna Calvi and the …
Leave Rihanna alone! A manifesto for healthier pop fandom in the 2020s In the final days of December, speculation that Rihanna might be about to release her ninth album, known among fans simply as R9, entered overdrive. D …
Jak Kilby obituary My friend Jak Kilby, who has died aged 72, was a freelance photographer who documented the early years of the free jazz and free improvisation scene i …
Bad Boys for Life review – odd-couple Miami cops back with a blast Martin Lawrence may not have starred in a motion picture for close to a decade, but he has a special place in my life. When I went to see his dopey 20 …
Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 2020: Whitney Houston, Depeche Mode and more inducted The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, self-appointed definers of the pop music canon, have announced the artists being inducted for 2020. A group of more th …
'Daringly eclectic': Tilda Swinton to receive BFI fellowship Tilda Swinton, an actor whose eclectic career has included both Derek Jarman arthouse movies and Marvel universe blockbusters, is to receive one of Br …
Be Natural: The Untold Story of Alice Guy-Blaché review – paean to a movie pioneer Pamela B Green’s hectic, garrulous, fascinating documentary recovers the story of French film-maker Alice Guy-Blaché (working from Alison McMahan’s bo …
Tom Hanks becomes honorary citizen of Greece Of all the roles Tom Hanks has ever played, being himself and being Greek may be the easiest yet. Or at least that is how it would seem from the Holly …
Gold singer: Billie Eilish v Shirley Bassey – who is more Bond? James Bond is getting on a bit – the first film came out 58 years ago – but it seems his latest adventure will still sound fresh, with the 18-year-old …
Waves review – high-school sports star wrestles with his emotions Summary: After disturbing us all with survivalist thriller It Comes at Night in 2017, Texan film-maker Trey Edward Shults – still just 31 – steps up his alread …
Inside the odyssey: taking a closer look at Stanley Kubrick's 2001 Summary: Though the calendar reads 2020 we’re still waiting for the future promised in 2001. Stanley Kubrick’s 1968 film, created concurrently with Arthur C Cl …
Courteeners: More. Again. Forever. review – fighting the death of indie Just before Christmas, the Official Charts Company published the Top 100 biggest-selling singles and albums of the 2010s. If you needed evidence of th …
'It's a war between technology and a donkey' – how AI is shaking up Hollywood Summary: If Sunspring is anything to go by, artificial intelligence in film-making has some way to go. This short film, made as an entry to Sci-Fi London’s 48- …
Midas touch: how to create the perfect James Bond song Summary: Goldfinger opens with a shot of a floating fake duck that turns out to be attached to a wetsuit-clad Sean Connery as James Bond. He clambers out of th …
Morbius: has Sony brokered a deal for part of Marvel's Cinematic Universe? Who’s that muscular, ripped, pasty-looking fellow wrenching the dregs of his comic-book movie career from the deathly places of despair? Why it’s Osca …
Kathy Bates: 'I told Clint that after 50 years, I feel like I've hit the big time' ‘Oh, I’m a bumper!” says Kathy Bates as I reach out to shake her hand. A small fist comes towards me with a large, round, pink-rose ring on the middle …
Political rockers Algiers: 'The US is in a complete spiral and collapse' Last February, Algiers released one of the most extraordinary tracks of 2019. Can the Sub_Bass Speak? was a five-minute collage of free-jazz sax, drum …
Various: London Is the Place for Me: The Music of Young Black London, Vols 7 & 8 review – joyous blends Creole languages and culture can be loosely defined as those that have been mixed: a natural blending of influences over time to create a new hybridit …
Mac Miller: Circles review – late rapper still pushing hip-hop's boundaries Mac Miller died in September 2018, just weeks after releasing his fifth album, Swimming. A languid and lightly funky rap record, it combined rich, sop …
Halsey: Manic review – takes confessional pop to the next level Summary: From the depressed self-medication documented in the emo-rap scene to the soul-baring by the likes of Ariana Grande and Selena Gomez, we’re living in …
Bombay Bicycle Club: Everything Else Has Gone Wrong review – songs to buy a mid-range hatchback to Even when reunions are no longer surprising but inevitable, Bombay Bicycle Club’s return is striking: just four years after they split, here is a fift …
Grammys chief Deborah Dugan suspended after misconduct allegation Deborah Dugan, president and chief executive of the Recording Academy, which organises the Grammy awards, has been suspended following an accusation o …
070 Shake: Modus Vivendi review – paranoid jams and futuristic gospel 070 Shake has a voice that sounds invincible. The world first heard it when she was plucked from comparative obscurity to sing on Kanye West’s haphaza …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Dream Nails, Tame Impala, Georgia Dream Nails Text Me Back (Chirpse Degree Burns) Millennial culture is crying out for a horror franchise called Two Blue Ticks. This generation’s Blair …
Slipknot review – a haven of euphoric noise in a world gone mad It’s 21 years since Slipknot blazed out of Iowa with their eponymous debut album and a striking USP. Their horror masks tapped into the movie-viewing …
Philharmonia/Salonen review – Turnage gets the horn Summary: Towards Alba, Mark-Anthony Turnage’s new horn concerto, was written for Richard Watkins, who gave its premiere with the Philharmonia under Esa-Pekka S …
Eminem faces backlash after comparing himself to Manchester Arena bomber Eminem has been criticised after comparing himself to the Manchester Arena suicide bomber. His track Unaccommodating, taken from his new album Music t …
Streaming: the best of My French Film Festival Now in its 10th edition, the online My French Film Festival has become a comforting January tradition. At a time of year when we seem to have been por …
Just Mercy: new film that captures the start of a brilliant civil rights career Summary: In an emotionally charged scene in the new movie Just Mercy, Jamie Foxx, cast as a death row prisoner named Walter McMillian, accosts the young lawyer …
The week in classical: La bohème; Nature Unwrapped review – from the garret to the stars Summary: Each encounter with Puccini’s La bohème – assuming the performance is up to scratch, which the Royal Opera’s latest revival is – makes you rethink the …
One to watch: Hatis Noit The word “spellbinding” has been liberally daubed over everything from reviews of the musical Wicked to every album Bon Iver has ever released (and do …
Mac Miller: Circles review – a last look inward for a complex talent Mac Miller’s narrative arc was genuinely surprising. A capable but derivative white rapper from Pittsburgh with neck tattoos, his early works about pa …
Bombshell review – redacted notes on a scandal “To get ahead, you gotta give a little head,” joked former chairman and chief executive of Fox News Roger Ailes, before the 76-year-old was brought to …
Citizen Bravo, Raymond MacDonald and Friends: Return to Y’Hup: The World of Ivor Cutler review – charming tribute to a national treasure Surveying Rip It Up, the National Museum of Scotland’s 2018 celebration of Caledonian pop, Matt Brennan and Raymond MacDonald noted a conspicuous abse …
Julian Lloyd Webber: I’ll  quit top music job over arts cash cuts Julian Lloyd Webber, the former virtuoso cellist, is to step down from his job as principal of Birmingham’s music conservatoire if a block on national …
Mura Masa: Raw Youth Collage review – confused and bitty You can’t accuse the 23-year-old Guernsey producer Mura Masa of false advertising. Raw Youth Collage, his second album, is bitty and a little raw – no …
Neneh Cherry: ‘Rap is a kind of freedom’ One of BBC Four’s recent Top of the Pops reruns from the late 1980s features a performance that many of us who were young girls at the time vividly re …
Midnight Traveler review – a remarkable, moving portrait of the refugee crisis Eight-year-old Nargis is crying because she’s bored. The daughter of Afghan film-makers Hassan Fazili and Fatima Hossaini, she spent three years witho …
Grit Orchestra/Celtic Connections review – filmic fusion from an 80-strong band Glasgow’s annual roots music jamboree Celtic Connections may have only just launched but the breakout star of the 27th edition has already emerged. A …
070 Shake: Modus Vivendi review – an impressive statement of intent Among the few highlights from Kanye West’s 2018 album, ye, were two features from emerging New Jersey artist Danielle Balbuena – known by the moniker …
Street Scene review – full justice for murder in Manhattan First performed in Philadelphia in 1946 before a Broadway transfer the following year, Street Scene, now given a fine new production by Opera North, i …
Why was pioneering director Alice Guy-Blaché erased from film-making history? Call yourself a cinephile and you’ve never heard of Alice Guy-Blaché? Don’t worry, most film-makers haven’t heard of her either. But we all should hav …
Jimmy Heath, jazz saxophonist for Miles Davis and more, dies aged 93 Jimmy Heath, the US jazz performer and composer whose career spanned seven decades, has died of natural causes aged 93. His death was confirmed to the …
Why is the world so obsessed with the new pictures of Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston? No one will remember anything from this year’s film awards season. The winning movies will fade from memory, like so many before them. The winning act …
Radiohead Public Library: archive of band's work goes live Radiohead have launched a new online archive of their work, called Radiohead Public Library, as well as releasing previously unavailable rarities to s …
Beethoven: the 1808 concert review – a remarkable evening, then, and now Beethoven’s 1808 benefit concert was one of classical music’s most remarkable evenings: it featured four premieres, including the 5th and 6th symphoni …
CBSO/Gražinytė-Tyla review – massed forces rise to a monumental Mahler Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla is taking it steadily, but she is already almost halfway through a Mahler cycle with the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra. U …
Jimmy Heath obituary Summary: The saxophonist Jimmy Heath, who has died aged 93, flew the flag for bebop – that hyperactive, melodically cryptic, highwire-act of a jazz idiom – wit …
What Did Jack Do? review – David Lynch's surprise Netflix short is pure, surreal style Dropping short films without warning is the new rock’n’roll for A-list directors right now: Paul Thomas Anderson did it with the dance piece Anima and …
Royal wedding cellist calls for action on diversity in music Sheku Kanneh-Mason, the award-winning cellist who rose to prominence after performing at Harry and Meghan’s wedding, has called for greater investment …
Jonathan Pryce: ‘There’s a definite shortage of 72-year-old Welsh men’ It is the day after the Oscar nominations, and Jonathan Pryce is perched at a corner table in a humdrum London bar, guest of honour at the saddest cel …
Anthony Braxton Standard Quartet review – melodies twisted into unfamiliar territory The standard is a quintessential concept in jazz. A canonical composition reinterpreted and disassembled by both new players and established elders, t …
Ozzy Osbourne reveals Parkinson's diagnosis Summary: Ozzy Osbourne has revealed he has been diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease after a year of health problems. During an interview with Good Morning Ameri …
Letter: Tony Britton obituary In his obituary of Tony Britton, Michael Coveney noted the intriguing disconnect between the actor’s humble Midlands origins and his subsequent “debon …
M*A*S*H at 50: the Robert Altman comedy that revels in cruel misogyny M*A*S*H is a rare example of a movie that has been eclipsed by its television adaptation. The 1983 finale of the long-running sitcom about a medical u …
Suspended Grammys chief Deborah Dugan alleges sexual misconduct in Recording Academy Deborah Dugan, the chief executive and president of the Recording Academy, which organises the Grammy awards, who was suspended last week after a misc …
Will the Kung Fu remake right the wrongs suffered by Bruce Lee? One of the most startling moments in Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon a Time in Hollywood is the scene in which Brad Pitt’s Cliff Booth humiliates Bruce …
'A toolbox for his work': fundraiser launched to save Derek Jarman's home A public fundraising campaign to save the home and garden of the artist and film-maker Derek Jarman has been launched with a deadline of 10 weeks to r …
Present.Perfect. review – China's livestreamers looking for love Shengzhe Zhu’s interesting and at times eerie documentary is an edited curation of hundreds of hours of live-stream videos in China. People (or “ancho …
The month's best mixes: mutating moods and club-ready wreckers DJ Taj Jersey Club Winter Mix 2020 TikTok’s meme-driven transformation of Old Town Road into a global blockbuster hit was cultural amplification on an …
Everything: The Real Thing Story review – endearingly told Brit-soul music doc Simon Sheridan’s solid, efficient documentary pays tribute to the Liverpudlian pop-soul beat combo the Real Thing, who had a No 1 in the UK with the s …
Juice WRLD's death ruled accidental oxycodone and codeine overdose The rapper Juice WRLD’s official cause of death has been ruled an accidental overdose. The Cook county medical examiner’s office cited toxic levels of …
The Rescue review – turbulent Chinese air-rescue adventure Summary: This goofy event movie is vying for the attentions of the Chinese lunar new year audience: a frenetic, exhausting mix of soap and spectacle. It’s over …
Controversial documentaries and A-listers head to Sundance 2020 Summary: A host of buzzy star-led documentaries and a some major A-list actors will be headlining this year’s Sundance film festival, which kicks off in Park C …
Paw Patrol: Ready, Race, Rescue! review – 48 minutes in the pits They sure do churn em out. Here’s another episode of Nickelodeon’s animated TV show about a team of rescue dogs, jazzed up and padded out into a 48-mi …
Quentin Tarantino: I am in combat with blockbuster franchises Quentin Tarantino has joined Martin Scorsese in voicing discontent at the dominance of franchise and superhero films, suggesting there is a “war for m …
#AnneFrank. Parallel Stories review – Helen Mirren hosts a heartfelt tribute The 75th anniversary of the Auschwitz liberation has been marked by this heartfelt and valuable documentary, presented on camera by Helen Mirren, cent …
Louise Alder & Joseph Middleton: Lines Written During a Sleepless Night review – worth staying up for Here’s a really lovely disc from two of classical song’s brightest artists. The soprano Louise Alder and pianist Joseph Middleton start with Rachmanin …
Sinfonietta/Fischer review – mystery and awe, from Debussy to Harvey The London Sinfonietta’s Sound Across a Century is a two-part set of lecture-concerts, presented by the musicologist Jonathan Cross, exploring the mod …
J Hus – Big Conspiracy review: British rap star lights up his own lane Earlier this week, it became apparent that J Hus’s new album, the follow-up to 2017’s Brit and Mercury-nominated Common Sense, had leaked. It was a th …
Still a boys' club: don't fall for the hype that the music industry has changed The 2020 Grammys almost made it over the finish line without controversy. The nominees for this Sunday’s ceremony boasted unprecedented gender equalit …
Pet Shop Boys: 'The acoustic guitar should be banned' The new Pet Shop Boys album is, they say, the third in a trilogy. Hotspot follows 2013’s Electric and 2016’s Super, all collaborations with producer S …
The Turning review – ham-fisted trickery saps a classic ghost story Henry James’s classic 1898 ghost story The Turn of the Screw is splodged with unsubtlety in this jump-scary new screen version, wasting a lot of actin …
Arandel: InBach review – Bach through 100 electronic kaleidoscopes Summary: More than the work of any other composer, Johann Sebastian Bach’s music seems to be genre-neutral. Over the past three centuries these pure, uninflect …
Twin Atlantic: Power review – Soaring Scot-rockers' smooth synth detour As the charts bristle with elliptical trap chants and the patchwork motifs of too-cool-for-choruses pop, your best bet for big, euphoric melodies now …
The Holy Mountain review – inside the mind of a visionary provocateur Alejandro Jodorowsky’s 1973 film is now revived in UK cinemas: a plumply overripe fruit of the counterculture, dripping with the juices of spiritual r …
Wire: Mind Hive review – sinewy, stripped-back, fearful – and beautiful The career of Wire, frontman Colin Newman once proudly announced, is “a one-way trip”. It’s not an idle boast. On stage today, you might get one song …
Okay Kaya: Watch This Liquid Pour Itself review – strange dream-pop tales of thwarted lust On this beguiling second album by New York singer Kaya Wilkins, it’s as if heartbreak has been translated into her native Norwegian and back again via …
Nicolas Godin: Concrete and Glass review – a pretty facade on shaky foundations It’s hard to credit now how revolutionary Air’s first album, Moon Safari, sounded in 1998 – a soufflé of a record so light and fluffy it was irresisti …
From Skepta’s dystopia to Travis Scott’s fairground: are immersive shows the future of live music? Live shows, we are often told, are where like-minded people join together in a shared euphoria. In reality, however, you are either pressed up against …
Miss Americana review – Taylor Swift doc is too stage-managed to truly sing Summary: It’s safe to say that by the end of Miss Americana, a quickie documentary on the recent trials and tribulations of Taylor Swift opening this year’s Su …
La Roux: 'My label dropped me on New Year's Day. I was like, yippee!' This is part of my stage set from Glastonbury 2010,” says Elly Jackson, AKA La Roux, pointing at an 8ft gold- and silver-plated palm tree. “I got ligh …
Streaming: where to find the best Jokers in the pack To call Joker “the gift that keeps on giving” runs somewhat counter to the general spirit of Todd Phillips’s nihilistic supervillain spectacle: perhap …
The Lighthouse director Robert Eggers on storms, seagulls and spraying Robert Pattinson with a hose This is getting very granular for me,” says Robert Eggers, half-jokingly, half-uncomfortably. We were talking about Eggers’s obsession with history, b …
Ironbark review – Benedict Cumberbatch heats up solid Cold War drama There’s an old-fashioned sturdiness to Cold War drama Ironbark, the kind not often seen at Sundance, alluded to by festival director John Cooper befor …
From fake maps to golden tickets: the film props of artist Annie Atkins Summary: Bringing Wes Anderson’s vision for The Grand Budapest Hotel to life seems to have been a labour of love for all involved. For none more so, perhaps, t …
The week in classical: Street Scene; SCO/ Emelyanychev – review Sweltering heat, a crowded Manhattan tenement of people failing to mind each other’s business, Kurt Weill’s Street Scene (1946) bristles with disconte …
One to watch: Obongjayar Much of London’s recent music output is indebted to west Africa. Whether it’s the way that contemporary Nigerian pop genre Afrobeats has melded with r …
Black Country, New Road review – truly a sound less travelled There are, apparently, seven people on stage, making what sounds like eastern Mediterranean rave music. The lighting (of which there is little) and th …
The Turning review – stolid take on The Turn of the Screw This contemporary adaptation of The Turn of the Screw takes the ornate enigma of Henry James’s gothic novella and whittles it down into something rath …
Melina Matsoukas: ‘I didn't grow up seeing dark-skinned people fall in love on screen’ Melina Matsoukas, 39, directed some of the most acclaimed music videos of the 2010s, including Rihanna’s We Found Love, Solange’s Losing You and Beyon …
On the Record: the music industry #MeToo doc that caused Oprah to turn away At a festival filled with smaller films jostling for attention, and quite often distribution, making headlines two weeks before Sundance has even kick …
Home listening: August Stradal, the Kitgut Quartet and Kenneth Hamilton • For me, and it seems for many others (more than 7m hits on Spotify and counting), a standout classical music track of recent times is Víkingur Ólafs …
British stars unveil alternative Bafta list in film diversity row A group of leading British stars and film directors, including Gemma Arterton, Carey Mulligan and Joely Richardson, are to speak out this week against …
No Fathers in Kashmir review – dithering heights A naive British teenager travels to war-ravaged Kashmir with her mother to meet her grandparents, and to learn the truth about her missing father in t …
The Personal History of David Copperfield review – Iannucci makes Dickens his own Having found unexpected laughter in the historical horrors of The Death of Stalin, Armando Iannucci works comedic wonders with the labyrinthine twists …
Pet Shop Boys: Hotspot review – evergreen dancefloor nous Neil Tennant has never been one to shy away from the issues, but during his 35 years as a cerebral pop operator, he has usually held them at arm’s len …
The Teskey Brothers review – Aussie blues revivalists let the good times roll It feels preposterous to suggest a band who formed in 2008 are enjoying a meteoric rise, but in the case of the Teskey Brothers, it makes a weird kind …
Angela Hewitt review – brain-teasing Bach and Beethoven's bite Beethoven’s admiration for Bach knew no bounds. So in this year marking the 250th anniversary of his birth, Beethoven would doubtless have felt flatte …
Present. Perfect. review – chilling documentary on Chinese live streaming Since 2016, live streaming – individuals filming and broadcasting themselves in real time – has become a major phenomenon in China, an industry and fo …
Halsey: Manic review –  sounds a bit like everything you know, but better If Billie Eilish is the US pop star already defining the 2020s with her low-key rasp, then 25-year-old Halsey feels like the Pink to her Robyn. Both h …
Worth review  – Michael Keaton  excels in powerful 9/11 drama Summary: About midway through fact-based legal drama Worth, Michael Keaton, playing Ken Feinberg, the lawyer tasked with deciding how best to compensate the fa …
Uncle Frank review – top form Paul Bettany lifts phony Alan Ball drama A new synonym for the phrase “elevating the material” was born at the 2020 Sundance Film Festival. It is “Paul Bettany in Alan Ball’s Uncle Frank”. Th …
Schoolboy Q review – South Central energy with a nod to Kendrick If there’s a name that Quincy Hanley, AKA Schoolboy Q, could justifiably feel tired of hearing in connection with his own then it’s that of Kendrick L …
Poliça: When We Stay Alive review – airs of elegant detachment Minneapolis’s Poliça set out their stall on their excellent 2012 debut, Give You the Ghost. With Ryan Olson’s ahead-of-its-time blend of indie, alt-R& …
Shirley review – Elisabeth Moss anchors darkly compelling literary psychodrama Summary: As willfully unconventional as a literary portrait could possibly be, Madeline’s Madeline director Josephine Decker’s take on Shirley Jackson is a thr …
Letter: Herbert Chappell obituary I knew Herbert Chappell from when he was working on his doctorate at Oxford. Having graduated in English, I embarked, without formal qualifications an …
Promising Young Woman review – Carey Mulligan ignites fiery #MeToo revenge tale Summary: There aren’t many films at this year’s Sundance film festival that boast a premise quite as tantalising as that of Promising Young Woman, a candy-colo …
Grammy awards 2020: full list of winners Record of the year Bon Iver – Hey, Ma Billie Eilish – Bad Guy – WINNER Ariana Grande – 7 Rings H.E.R. – Hard Place Khalid – Talk Lil Nas X featuring B …
Grammy awards 2020: Billie Eilish wins big, Kobe Bryant tributes pour in Summary: Billie Eilish reigned supreme at the Grammys on Sunday night, winning five awards including best new artist, album of the year and song of the year fo …
Downhill review – Ferrell and Louis-Dreyfus crash with redundant remake When it was announced in 2018 that the critically adored Swedish comedy Force Majeure would be remade by Fox, the overwhelming response from anyone wh …
Cremate me to the sound of Disco Inferno! What song do you want to die to? We frame our lives with music, celebrating birthdays and anniversaries to curated playlists, labouring over tracks to give birth to. But when we’re dy …
Kobe Bryant's Dear Basketball: a love letter to a sport that is now a poignant epitaph Dear Basketball was always a bittersweet piece of work. This was the Oscar-winning short film from 2017 directed by the Disney animator Glen Keane, wi …
Grammys 2020: Billie Eilish's triumph overshadowed but well-deserved Almost all awards ceremonies tend to come with a side order of controversy, but whatever took place at this year’s Grammys was clearly going to be ove …
Clara Schumann songs review - giving voice to unfamiliar and fascinating music Unlike Alma Schindler, who was forced to give up all her ambitions to compose when she married Gustav Mahler, Robert Schumann positively encouraged hi …
Xylouris White review – fearless and joyous Greek folk music A former garage on an industrial estate in Salford may seem an unusual place to find traditional Greek folk music on a Sunday evening. Nevertheless, t …
Celtic Connections to scale back on overseas acts to fight climate crisis A Scottish festival celebrating international folk, roots and traditional music has said it may have to limit the number of overseas artists it invite …
Survivor: how we made Eye of the Tiger Jim Peterik, former keyboardist Survivor had released two albums, neither of which had done particularly well, and we were worried our label was going …
Small music venues to get 50% reduction in business rates The government has committed to reducing business rates for small and medium-sized music venues in England and Wales for the first time. The 50% reduc …
Catharsis queen: how Billie Eilish became the voice of Gen Z – and the Grammys Just before Billie Eilish won album of the year at the Grammys on Sunday night, she was caught on camera. “Please don’t be me, please,” she appeared t …
Wendy review – Peter Pan fantasy that never grows up into an interesting film Summary: Wendy, a spin on JM Barrie’s Peter Pan myth, takes all the chaos, noise and lack-of-focus of director Benh Zeitlin’s earlier picture Beasts of the Sou …
The familiar Sydney sound spliced into Billie Eilish's Bad Guy If you listened carefully, you might just have heard it. Sitting underneath the pulsating chorus of Billie Eilish’s Grammy award-winning smash hit, Ba …
Why 1917 should win the best picture Oscar Ever since All Quiet on the Western Front, the least we’ve come to expect from a war-is-hell actioner is grungy realism. Yet in Sam Mendes’s 1917, the …
Actor Daniel Kaluuya says he is tired of being asked about race The Get Out and Black Panther star Daniel Kaluuya has said he doesn’t want to be defined by racial issues and he finds it boring to talk about his wor …
Oscars 2020 nominees photo: statement suits, sneaky hats and bicep curls For years, the annual Oscar nominees luncheon photo has followed a very strict blueprint. Every single person nominated for an award, be they cast or …
Every Studio Ghibli film – ranked! Summary: 22. Porco Rosso (1992) The first of Hayao Miyazaki’s aviation-themed films, it remains unclear why its pilot character is a pig (unfortunately, a sexi …
Sylvie's Love review – heartfelt period romance is a thrilling throwback In trying to painstakingly recreate the spirit of a specific genre from a specific moment in time, film-makers often fall into pastiche, focusing so h …
The Last Thing He Wanted review – misfiring Anne Hathaway thriller The Last Thing He Wanted, a package that must have seemed seductive on paper, with a red-hot writer-director, a stacked cast of Oscar winners and nomi …
'No philosophy and everybody is welcome': how Closer catalysed Ukrainian electronica You get the feeling you’re in for a big night as soon as you exit the taxi outside Closer. Climbing the graffitied staircase that leads to the Kyiv cl …
Sturgill Simpson review – a trudge along the highways of Southern rock It’s hard not to admire Sturgill Simpson’s refusal to give two hoots about expectations. This is a man who followed his breakthrough album of psychede …
How I Became a Gangster. True Story review – dire, derivative mob caper The Polish cinema industry likes churning out gangster movies, rather like our own film business in the Uncool Britannia era of the late 90s/early nou …
Kobe Bryant to be honoured at Oscars The Oscars will honour basketball great Kobe Bryant during the Academy awards ceremony on 9 February. Bryant died on Sunday in a helicopter crash in C …
Quezon's Game review – second world war refugee drama lands with a thud In 1939, Philippines president Manuel Quezon gave sanctuary to 1,200 Jews from Germany and Austria as other countries slammed their doors shut. Quezon …
Willem Dafoe and Hillary Clinton to attend Berlin film festival Willem Dafoe, Elle Fanning and Hillary Clinton are among the big names heading for the German capital after the Berlin film festival announced its com …
Would you recognise this man without his name tag? Would you recognize this man without his name tag? Close inspection of said name tag reveals that it belongs to none other than “Brad Pitt. Actor in a …
Hylda Sims obituary My friend, Hylda Sims, the skiffle singer, poet, songwriter and activist, has died aged 87, after a short illness. Hylda was a strong presence on the …
The Rhythm Section review – Blake Lively on a thrilling quest for revenge A serviceable picture from the 007 stable presided over by producers Michael G Wilson and Barbara Broccoli, and adapted by author Mark Burnell from hi …
Bafta shorts 2020 review – cheeky romance and the power of skateboards The Bafta nominees up for best short film at this Sunday’s award ceremony – five live-action and three animation – make up another very enjoyable coll …
Minari review – moving and modest coming-of-age Sundance hit In a year without many talk-of-the-town breakout hits, the word that’s been repeated most often at Sundance has been Minari. Arriving at the festival …
Why Jojo Rabbit should win the best picture Oscar Only the most die-hard Taika Waititi fan would think that Jojo Rabbit is anything but a plucky outsider when it comes to the best picture race. Comedy …
Talking About Trees review – how the lights went out in Sudan's cinemas This witty and engaging cinephile documentary begins surreally with its subjects, four older male Sudanese film-makers, recreating the famous “closeup …
A third Blade Runner movie is as inevitable as the robot revolution Has there ever been a science fiction movie more primed for sequels than Denis Villeneuve’s Blade Runner 2049? At the end of the Oscar-winning 2017 ne …
Jonas Brothers review – slick, bombastic and knowingly cheesy Disney alumni often proudly distance themselves from the mouse that built them. Miley Cyrus, Demi Lovato and Selena Gomez have left behind clean-cut i …
Show Me the Picture: The Story of Jim Marshall review – shooting stars Jim Marshall is not a household name, but many of the photographs he took, especially of pop, rock and jazz musicians, are seared into our collective …
Madonna review – London residency short on hits but big on British banter A curious mix of anticipation and trepidation hangs in the air of the London Palladium as the audience dutifully stash their mobile phones in locked p …
Return to Y'Hup: The World of Ivor Cutler review – tribute to surreal poet's fantasy island Summary: A self-described “oblique musical philosopher”, Ivor Cutler was the Glasgow-born surrealist who wielded whimsy like a dagger. He bewitched everyone fr …
The most disturbing talking animals in film – ranked! 10. Bernie – Zookeeper (2011) Imagine Dolittle, but about a depressed zookeeper whose girlfriend had left him because he was a zookeeper, and the subs …
Queen & Slim review – odd couple on the run in a punchy thriller Big, charismatic performances and exuberant energy keep this movie on the road. It’s a serio-comic Bonnie-and-Clyde adventure, written by Lena Waithe …
Clairières: Songs by Lili and Nadia Boulanger review  – perfect advocacy for sibling composers Last year, tenor Nicholas Phan and pianist Myra Huang built a recital disc around Fauré’s song cycle La Bonne Chanson. They have followed it with a di …
A Beautiful Day in the Neighbourhood review – Tom Hanks puts cynicism on the naughty step Has anyone in Britain ever heard of Fred Rogers? He was an American children’s TV presenter whose folksy show for toddlers, Mister Rogers’ Neighborhoo …
No politics please, we're Oscar contenders Summary: This season’s lineup of awards contenders has much to offer: it may be the best crop of hopefuls for a decade. Fine direction, acting, sound, design a …
Berlin film festival suspends prize after Nazi past of director revealed The Berlin film festival has suspended one of its major prizes after revelations that its founding director, Alfred Bauer, after whom the award is nam …
His House review – effective haunted house horror with timely spin With his striking debut feature His House, British writer-director Remi Weekes has constructed a horror film that takes the overstuffed and overfamili …
Parasite director Bong Joon-ho: 'Korea seems glamorous, but the young are in despair' The past year has been a whirlwind for Bong Joon-ho, and he is still in the midst of it. His movie Parasite has whisked him to places few directors – …
Why Ford v Ferrari should win the best picture Oscar Let’s imagine the best picture award was given to the film that was most well-liked. Then, this year, Ford v Ferrari would win. That’s not to say it’s …
Richard Jewell review – Clint Eastwood's bomb-hero drama fails to detonate Clint Eastwood’s latest film is a miscarriage-of-justice tale taken from real life, a parable about the evils of “big government” that plays like a we …
Behind the scenes at Alice's Adventures Under Ground – a photo essay Director/designer Antony McDonald during rehearsals for the world premiere of Gerald Barry’s Alice’s Adventures Under Ground at London’s Royal Opera H …
Shenseea: 'I grew up listening to Rihanna. Now she's listening to me' Shenseea is midway through a European tour, staying in a budget hotel at the side of a dual carriageway in London. Despite her surroundings, she exude …
Orchestre National de Lille/Bloch review – masterful French music ‘J’aime la musique française” is what the Orchestre National de Lille were calling this programme, when performing at home last week. The audience on …
Squarepusher: Be Up a Hello review – devilish, danceable return Emerging in the mid-90s as part of the generation of artists defining Warp Records’ IDM sound, Squarepusher now presides over a discography that posit …
Blossoms: Foolish Loving Spaces review – marvellously uncool exuberance Towards the beginning of the last decade, with indie conclusively out to pasture, a handful of male groups that might once have made mileage out of be …
'It's a war zone': why is a generation of rappers dying young? It might sound callous, but Jacob Thureson’s parents, Erik and Judy, were not too worried when they heard about his latest overdose. It had happened a …
Parasite comes out on top at London Critics’ Circle film awards South Korean satire Parasite has unexpectedly emerged the big winner at the London Critics’ Circle film awards, taking home prizes for film of the yea …
K Michelle: All Monsters Are Human review – slick R&B with a sharp whiff of smut Like most people who have managed to extract long-term success from reality TV stardom, K Michelle is well-versed in the art of the overshare. The Ten …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Hayley Williams, Mitski, Stephen Malkmus Hayley Williams Simmer Hayley Williams was first signed as a solo artist, at age 14, to a major label who wanted her to become a mall-rock teen queen …
Elon Musk's new EDM single reviewed – 'Bringing erectile dysfunction to the masses!' Like Charles Foster Kane splashing his millions on promoting his mistress’s disastrous opera career, very rich men have, in recent years, displayed a …
No country for young men: why are the male actor nominees so old? It is hardly breaking news that Hollywood skews towards white males, but looking down this awards season’s acting nominations, a certain kind of white …
Baftas' status at stake in diversity debate, say film industry insiders Changes that Bafta needs to make to ensure it is more representative could cost the event its status as the second most important film awards in the w …
How Brad Pitt's zen reinvention has paved the way for Oscar glory Summary: Every awards season has its darling. An actor whose modesty, wit and earnest embrace of the Oscar race charms both punters and peers. Last year, it wa …
Radio 4's Brexit music: it feels like something for a secular funeral With rather splendid timing, on Thursday Radio 3 broadcast a live concert of the Hallé Orchestra playing Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony, at the start of M …
Bob Shane obituary In 1958 the Kingston Trio, a clean-cut American folk group, achieved chart success with the murder ballad Tom Dooley. Based on the story of Tom Dula, …
'It makes people uncomfortable': inside the Weinstein-inspired thriller about complicity The horror in The Assistant, a new film about an entry-level employee at a Weinstein-esque film production company, trickles out slowly, in bits small …
Streaming: our guide to Ghibli as the collection hits Netflix Netflix concentrates so much of its promotional effort on pushing its original content – particularly at Oscar time, with The Irishman, Marriage Story …
The week in classical: Igor Levit; BBC SO/ Saraste; OAE/ Norrington – review Why or where a piece of music was written, to force a complex debate into a stubby observation, matters more with some composers than others. For Shos …
Baftas 2020: who will win – and who should win Summary: Best film Will win: 1917 (dir Sam Mendes) Should win: The Irishman (dir Martin Scorsese) Shoulda been a contender: Little Women (dir Greta Gerwig) Out …
One to watch: Sarah Mary Chadwick Need a boost? New Zealand singer-songwriter Sarah Mary Chadwick has your back! Hark to the rambunctious country-punk of recent single Let’s Fight: “At …
A Beautiful Day in the Neighbourhood – touching tribute to a US TV hero Fred Rogers – beloved in the States for his unfailingly sanguine persona, but largely unknown in the UK – was an American television presenter and the …
Risky turns and buried treasure: the best of Sundance 2020 As glamorous as covering the Sundance film festival can be – this year’s opening night delivered Taylor Swift to wintry Park City, Utah – it’s an assi …
Sam Lee: Old Wow review – a dazzling fusion of nature and song Ever since childhood singalongs around the fires of Forest School Camps, folksong and mother nature have been indivisible passions for Sam Lee. The si …
Andy Gill, influential guitarist with Gang of Four, dies aged 64 Summary: Andy Gill, the guitarist with Gang of Four, whose sound influenced generations of post-punk bands, has died aged 64. The news was announced by the ban …
Home listening: a good week for Ariadne Summary: • Countless composers have had a fascination with the abandoned figure of Ariadne, or Arianna, who helped Theseus kill the Cretan Minotaur and ended u …
The Man Who Killed Don Quixote review – Gilliam’s knight proves errant Terry Gilliam’s bloated if well-meaning riff on Miguel de Cervantes’s 17th-century novel has been “more than 25 years in the making and unmaking” acco …
Queen & Slim review – love on the run across the US racial divide Summary: This arresting debut feature from Melina Matsoukas – Grammy-award winning director of Beyoncé’s Formation video, whose television CV includes Master o …
J Hus: Big Conspiracy review – reflective but still reckless Summary: J Hus’s 2016 outing Common Sense was pivotal in evolving contemporary British urban music, bringing African R&B influences into London’s admixture of …
Richard Jewell review – Clint Eastwood’s cautionary tale for cynical times There is an elegant, even-handed character study buried within Clint Eastwood’s crisp procedural about a security guard who becomes a hero – and then …
Kesha: High Road review – back in the driver’s seat Summary: When Kesha Sebert emerged in 2009 as Ke$ha she was styled as the ultimate party girl, singing EDM-tinged anthems about glugging Jack Daniels for break …
Curiouser and curiouser: Thomas Adès on Gerald Barry's Wonderland Gerald Barry’s music inhabits the same kind of space that Lewis Carroll’s Alice books do. Carroll might not have put it like this (he was writing pre- …
Andy Gill: Gang of Four's genius guitarist who burned a route out of punk Britain’s late 70s provincial punk scenes were seldom places for the faint-hearted, but few were as starkly polarised as that in Leeds. At one extreme …
Siegfried review – Jurowski showcases Wagner with wonder and excitement The London Philharmonic’s Ring with Vladimir Jurowski goes, it would seem, from strength to strength. Presenting one opera a year, they have now reach …
Andy Gill obituary Summary: The post-punk period of the late 1970s and early 80s bred a number of innovative and challenging bands, of whom Gang of Four proved to be one of the m …
The full list of winners at the 2020 Bafta film awards Best film WINNER: 1917 The Irishman Joker Once Upon a Time in Hollywood Parasite Best actress Jessie Buckley – Wild Rose Scarlett Johansson – Marriage …
Baftas 2020: Sam Mendes and 1917 emerge victorious with seven awards Summary: Sam Mendes’s nerve-shredding war drama 1917 was the big winner at the 2020 Bafta film awards, on an evening when the movie industry’s diversity proble …
Joaquin Phoenix's attack on Baftas for 'systemic racism' hailed by film industry Joaquin Phoenix’s powerful broadside against the body that awarded him the best actor prize on Sunday night has met with a chorus of praise across the …
Baftas 2020: 1917 and Joaquin Phoenix triumph – as it happened And finally, here’s our story on that significant Joaquin Phoenix speech, definitely one of the talking points of the night. That’s it – we’re going t …
Taika Waititi jokes about Britain's colonial history as Jojo Rabbit wins a Bafta Taika Waititi’s Jojo Rabbit has won a Bafta for best adapted screenplay, with the New Zealand director thanking his mother and making a jab at Britain …
Shakira and J-Lo's Super Bowl show: an electric burst of energy Summary: Jennifer Lopez and Shakira did what they had to do at the Super Bowl half-time show this year at Hard Rock Stadium in Miami, Florida. It’s not an envi …
Why Parasite should win the best picture Oscar Bong Joon-ho’s Parasite is already a success story. Winner of the Palme d’Or, the top prize at the Cannes film festival, as well as best foreign langu …
50 great tracks for February from David Bowie, Waxahatchee, J Hus and more Waxahatchee – Fire Katie Crutchfield got sober before making her fifth album as Waxahatchee. The resulting clarity shines through Fire, the first song …
Mabel review – a blast of charisma from the warrior queen February is shaping up to be a hectic month for Mabel McVey. After finishing the sold-out UK leg of her current tour, she will perform at the Brit awa …
Carmen review – revival's real stars are Peleggi and the ENO orchestra Summary: It’s the world’s most performed French opera, but the success of Bizet’s Carmen has always rested on its parade of predictable Spanish icons: Gypsies, …
The Rock? Greta Thunberg? Who should have hosted this year's Oscars Dwayne ‘The Rock’ Johnson A charisma overload, the nicest guy in Hollywood, the obvious choice. The script writes itself: a few skits where Dwayne has …
Prince William's ticking off means Bafta must get serious about diversity Bafta likes to think of itself as a cut above its American counterparts, in terms of classiness at least, if not actual importance. Our world-beating …
How we made Free, by Ultra Naté Summary: Ultra Naté, singer, songwriter I fell into club culture in my first year at university in Baltimore. During the week, I’d be in classes, studying medi …
A weaponised hell-run of selfie-taking: my journey into the heart of the Baftas Not so long ago, I made plans to attend the Oscars. Whenever I mentioned this to people, you could measure their excitement in decibels. They’d scream …
HBO acquires film accusing Russell Simmons of abuse after Oprah's exit The documentary about several women who have accused Russell Simmons of sexual abuse, has found a distributor after Oprah Winfrey’s exit from the film …
Why The Irishman should win the best picture Oscar ‘Three people can keep a secret only when two of them are dead.” This is the maxim of slot-mouthed hitman Frank Sheeran in The Irishman, the wintry an …
The Lodge review – dread-filled chiller with a devastating twist There’s so, so much in writer-director pair Veronika Franz and Severin Fiala’s oppressive chiller The Lodge that recalls Ari Aster’s breakout hit Here …
Will 2020 be a turning point for female film-makers? A funny thing happened on the way to my eighth screening at this year’s Sundance film festival. Like many major lineups, it’s front-loaded with most o …
Death drive: why Danny Trejo's doomed legend will live for ever You may remember, a little while ago, that Kit Harington was named “the most likely actor of all time to appear in a scene where his character is kill …
London Sinfonietta review – the haunting charm of Mauricio Kagel It is 11 years since Mauricio Kagel died, but it’s still hard to pinpoint where he fits into the busy history of music since 1945. Though he lived mos …
Why Marriage Story should win the best picture Oscar ‘I knew the moment my marriage ended that someday it might make a book – if I could just stop crying about it. One of the things I’m proudest of is th …
Why Parasite misses the mark as a commentary on South Korean society Like the character Kim Ki-woo (Choi Woo-sik) in Parasite and its director Bong Joon-ho, I too have entered the home of Seoul’s elite as an English tut …
Austerity, gentrification and big tunes: why illegal raves are flourishing It’s an hour after midnight on New Year’s Day 2020, and a stream of revellers is gathering in an alleyway next to KFC on London’s Old Kent Road. They …
Bye bye box office: has Disney really given up on Star Wars movies? Summary: So that’s it. After three trilogies, at least two of them pretty flawed, and more than $10bn taken at the global box office, Star Wars as a going Holl …
Why was Katy Perry chosen to be an ambassador for the British Asian Trust? Name: Katy Perry. Age: 35. Occupation: New ambassador of the British Asian Trust. Oh great, good for her. No, not, “Oh great, good for her”. Let me as …
Daniel Isn’t Real review – ludicrous pretend-friend horror There are touches of M Night Shyamalan and Donnie Darko in this enjoyably ludicrous low-budget psychological horror, directed by Adam Egypt Mortimer, …
Plus One review – weddings romcom has seen it all before Here is a boilerplate romantic comedy from first-time feature directors Jeff Chan and Andrew Rhymer, co-writers of the Hulu TV comedy PEN15, whose sta …
La Dolce Vita at 60: the fame, the fortune, the fountain Federico Fellini’s 1960 masterpiece La Dolce Vita premiered in his native Italy 60 years ago today, eventually trickling into American theaters just a …
The Chats, Montaigne, Missy Higgins and more: Australia's best new music for February Missy Higgins – Carry You For fans of: Holly Throsby, James Taylor, the Whitlams The final episode of Tim Minchin’s stunning new series, Upright, clos …
Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn) review – a blitz of bad taste Watching Birds of Prey, I was reminded of a line from the recent Fox News sexual harassment drama Bombshell – when Kate McKinnon looks deep into Margo …
Slade drummer Don Powell 'fired by email' after 57-year partnership One of British pop’s most enduring partnerships has come to an end, not with a bang, but by email. Don Powell, the drummer with glam rock band Slade, …
Kirk Douglas, Hollywood legend and star of Spartacus, dies aged 103 Kirk Douglas, the self-styled “ragman’s son” who became the last great star of Hollywood’s golden age, has died at the age of 103. His son Michael ann …
Corey Feldman: 'The biggest problem in Hollywood is paedophilia' At first glance, Corey Feldman’s house looks ridiculous. A crooked Christmas wreath hangs on the front door, even though it is late January. Feldman’s …
Why Joker should win the best picture Oscar Even if it doesn’t happen, it would be a good idea for Joker to be awarded the best picture Oscar – mostly because it would signal Hollywood’s accepta …
Kirk Douglas: a career in clips Born Izzy Danielovitch into a poverty-stricken Jewish family in 1916, Douglas legally changed his name to Kirk Douglas on joining the navy during the …
Fando y Lis review – Jodorowsky's freaks-and-flesh debut The career of the Chilean artist, surrealist and film-maker Alejandro Jodorowsky began here, in 1968, with this debut movie, an example of underground …
Oscar shorts 2020 review – gripping drama and emotional animation The short films nominated for this year’s Oscars in the live action, animated and documentary categories feel very different from the Bafta shorts – t …
Gulls, buckets and masturbation: a lighthouse keeper on The Lighthouse “God, I’m glad I never went to that one,” says Neil Hargreaves, as the closing credits of The Lighthouse roll. Neil is a former lighthouse keeper. I h …
Frazey Ford: U Kin B the Sun review – bright shoots from knotted roots of American song Summary: The lead single from Frazey Ford’s 2015 album Indian Ocean, a coruscating breakup lament called Done, came accompanied by one of the great videos of t …
La Roux review – synth star throws a joyously sleazy blowout Summary: Whether it’s the spikier 80s synths of her 2009 breakthrough hits or the breezy disco stylings of her wonderful second album, 2014’s Trouble in Paradi …
A Streetcar Named Desire review – hard times in the Big Easy At the beginning of this drama, bewildered and highly-strung Blanche DuBois famously arrives in New Orleans off the train, intending to stay with her …
Prince William's Baftas tirade was insultingly misdirected – he should resign as its president The other day, I wrote to Prince William, urging him to resign. Not from his second-in-line thingy: he seems to do that job OK, if nowhere near as wel …
Kirk Douglas obituary Without irony or modesty, Kirk Douglas, who has died aged 103, saw himself as the archetypal American, a sturdy bridge between the abyss of the past a …
Guardians of Life review – Joaquin Phoenix's climate call goes down in flames Guardians of Life is a three-minute film from the director and environmental activist Shaun Monson, produced in collaboration with Extinction Rebellio …
Green Day: 'Rock'n'roll helps you dance through the apocalypse' Green Day are in their modest rehearsal space in their hometown of Oakland, California, a little haven in a country on the turn. The trio of 47-year-o …
Why Once Upon a Time in Hollywood should win the best picture Oscar One of the highlights of the final furlong of awards season is the Hollywood Reporter’s Brutally Honest Oscar Ballot series, in which Scott Feinberg t …
Dolittle review – Robert Downey Jr does nothing in pointless remake An exotic new film accent has arrived, to be treasured alongside Dick Van Dyke’s Beverly Hills cockney in Mary Poppins, Michael Keaton’s lockjaw Mumme …
Issie Barratt's Interchange: Donna's Secret review – big-band visions Back in the day, some fans would raise eyebrows at the implications of the term “jazz education” – preferring the romance that this impulsive music wa …
La Roux: Supervision review – obliquely beautiful, contrarian electro visionary When La Roux came to prominence in the late-00s with two shrill synthpop smashes – Bulletproof and In for the Kill – the duo were frequently discussed …
Beatrice Dillon: Workaround review – a global future-folk manifesto At the end of last year, the Guardian declared Beatrice Dillon “the most thrilling new voice in British electronic music”, and her first full-fledged …
Makaya McCraven and Gil Scott-Heron: We're New Here review – a modern classic revived For Makaya McCraven, sampling is a means of remembrance. The Chicago-based drummer and producer has spent recent years honing his studio style to inco …
Swag, charm and birthday party invites: how to win an Oscar in 2020 Buried in the endearingly manic jumble of thoughts and dedications in Olivia Colman’s dumbfounded Oscar acceptance speech last year – the one sealed a …
HMLTD: West of Eden review – riotous rock and grand guignol glam It seemed as though HMLTD’s moment had come and gone. A couple of years ago, their riotous gigs were the most fun you could have while paying too much …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Låpsley, Gorillaz, Elon Musk Summary: Låpsley Womxn Four years ago, the then-19-year-old emo-synth singer Holly Lapsley released a debut album that was a) Really quite incredible (yay!), a …
Liam Gallagher's son and Ringo Starr's grandson in court over Tesco affray charge The son of Liam Gallagher and the grandson of Ringo Starr have appeared in court to deny criminal charges over an alleged late-night altercation with …
Oscars 2020 predictions: who will win? Summary: Best picture Will win: 1917 Should win: The Irishman Shoulda been a contender: Portrait of a Lady on Fire Best director Will win: Bong Joon-ho for Par …
Ryan Beatty was set to be the next Bieber – then he realised he was living a lie Summary: Ryan Beatty was flying home to LA after a gig when he had an epiphany. “I remember we were about to take off and I just told my manager: ‘I can’t do t …
Judge rules Kesha defamed Dr Luke by claiming he raped Katy Perry A New York supreme court judge has ruled that Kesha defamed her former producer and label head Dr Luke – whose real name is Lukasz Gottwald – when she …
Stars urged to ditch the sequins at the Oscars to save the oceans Summary: Fashion insiders are warning the great and the good of Hollywood not to wear sequins on the Academy Awards red carpet because of their terrible enviro …
Love is (still) in the air: how the romcom came back from the dead The romcom was dead and buried. Matthew McConaughey had leaned against his final wall and Kate Hudson had been the recipient of her last grand romanti …
'The omnivore is alive and well in LA': the Oscars attempt to go green Extravagance is as much a part of awards season as the awards themselves, a lavish procession of parties, campaigning and red carpet opportunities lea …
Viral social media moments that deserve the Hollywood treatment The breakout hit at this year’s Sundance festival was Zola (pictured, above), a comic thriller about a stripper who travels to Florida for a weekend o …
Kirk Douglas: why his finest role was as a cynical newspaper hack Summary: The quiet newsroom of the Sun-Bulletin in Albuquerque, New Mexico, is just a temporary holding pen for Chuck Tatum, the restless and unprincipled repo …
One to watch: Pongo Summary: After a few years when pop was all about emotional bloodletting, now stars are refusing to be defined by trauma – see recent records by Kesha and Sele …
Anna Meredith review – a careering getaway ride from musical convention In 2016, shortly after the release of her celebrated debut, Varmints, Anna Meredith revealed her top tip for composers. “Learn to play Happy Birthday. …
Birds of Prey review – Margot Robbie goes full tilt as Harley Quinn Kudos to whoever it was at DC Comics who realised that, while the good guys in the stable are kind of played out (and let’s face it, the Batsuit is lo …
Carole Cadwalladr: my night inside the Bafta bubble Summary: There are those who have dreamed their whole life of walking the red carpet. And then there are those whose first instinct is to be on an entirely dif …
Take one: lost Dave Brubeck tapes reveal jazz hit originally sounded like ‘a bad student band’ It is the best-selling jazz single of all time. But previously unheard rehearsal tapes reveal that Dave Brubeck’s Take Five might never have been such …
Karen Sharp Trio: Another Place review – three is the magic number Britain’s professional jazz musicians, even those such as saxophonist-composer Karen Sharp who are voted top in magazine polls, don’t spend all their …
Oscars ad time to be hacked by protest against lack of female director nods The Oscars ceremony is no stranger to the act of protest, but this year will see arguably its most unique demonstration yet, because it won’t be takin …
H is for Happiness review – emotional affairs of adults seen through a bright, childlike lens The director John Sheedy’s coming of age film H is For Happiness – adapted from Barry Jonsberg’s novel My Life As an Alphabet – is photographed in joy …
Home listening: step up, Franz Clement and Henry Litolff • We’re going to hear a great deal of Beethoven this year, the 250th anniversary of his birth, but what of the music that shaped and influenced him, s …
Plus One review – a rom com worth falling for Wedding season has staked its claim over the summer months of newly single Alice (Maya Erskine) and perennial bachelor Ben (Jack Quaid). And in order …
Lil Wayne: Funeral review – fearsome and full of life So much of what is now standard in hip-hop can be traced back to the intervention of New Orleans rapper and label boss Lil Wayne: trap eccentricity an …
Underwater review – Kristen Stewart vehicle sinks without trace Summary: This underwater disaster flick, set on a deep-sea drilling rig, doesn’t even bother to disguise the fact that it’s essentially a subaqua version of Al …
Psappha review – Schoenberg's Pierrot Lunaire is truly groundbreaking Schoenberg’s Pierrot Lunaire belongs alongside Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring and a few other modernist masterpieces as one of the truly groundbreaking s …
Green Day: Father of All Motherfuckers review – apolitical angst with aplomb Given that George W Bush’s presidency so enraged Green Day they recorded 2004’s American Idiot in reaction, one could be forgiven for thinking that Fa …
Shopping: All Or Nothing review – more frenetic and kinetic than ever Invigorating vim is the calling card of British post-punk trio Shopping, whose sound across any of their three albums to date would slot neatly into a …
Drive-By Truckers: 'We have redneck in us. No one tells us what to do' Summary: Mike Cooley has a gift for aphorism. “Paranoia’s like pulled pork,” he says, in his deep Alabama baritone. “It’s on menus all over the world, but in t …
Rainy red carpet: bad weather at Oscars threatens to dampen A-listers' evening As Hollywood’s A-listers arrived for the 92nd Academy Awards ceremony in Los Angeles, there was a rush to ensure the red carpet was dry after a downpo …
Oscars tonight: timetable, predictions and all you need to know Summary: It only seems a few days since the Baftas bored everyone rigid impressed everyone with the sophistication of their choices – and that’s because it is. …
Parasite wins best original screenplay Oscar South Korean satire Parasite has won the best original screenplay Oscar at the 92nd Academy Awards. The film had to see off strong competition, includ …
'Time to shine': Janelle Monáe celebrates diversity in Oscars opening number Janelle Monáe opened the Oscars in hectic style with a performance of her 2009 song Come Alive – reworked with Oscar-appropriate lyrics. Beginning in …
Parasite wins best international feature film Oscar South Korean satire Parasite has won the best international film Oscar at the 92nd Academy Awards, the first Korean film to do so. It was the hot favo …
Bong Joon-ho wins the best director Oscar for Parasite Summary: South Korean film-maker Bong Joon-ho has become the second director of a foreign-language film to win the best director Oscar at the 92nd Academy Awar …
Rip Torn remembered at the Oscars ceremony Rip Torn, the Hollywood wild-man best known for his role on HBO series The Larry Sanders Show, has been remembered at the 92nd Academy Awards in Holly …
Anna Karina remembered at the Oscars ceremony Summary: Anna Karina, best known for the seven films she made with Jean-Luc Godard, including Bande à Part, Alphaville and Pierrot le Fou, has been remembered …
Star Wars actor Peter Mayhew remembered at the Oscars ceremony Summary: Peter Mayhew, best known as the man behind the Star Wars character Chewbacca, has been remembered at the 92nd Academy Awards in Hollywood. Mayhew, who …
Godfrey Gao remembered at Oscars ceremony Godfrey Gao, the Taiwanese-Canadian model and actor best known for his work on The Mortal Instruments, has been remembered at the 92nd Academy Awards …
Robert Forster remembered at the Oscars ceremony Summary: Robert Forster, the veteran actor who was Oscar-nominated for his work in Jackie Brown, has been remembered at the 92nd Academy Awards in Hollywood. F …
Peter Fonda remembered at the Oscars ceremony Peter Fonda, the iconic star of films such as Easy Rider, has been remembered at the 92nd Academy Awards in Hollywood. Fonda died aged 79 in August 20 …
Rutger Hauer remembered at the Oscars ceremony Rutger Hauer, the Dutch actor best known for his role in the seminal sci-fi film Blade Runner, has been remembered at the 92nd Academy Awards in Holly …
Kirk Douglas remembered at Oscars ceremony Summary: Kirk Douglas, the actor who became one of Hollywood’s biggest stars of the 1950s and 60s, has been remembered at the 92nd Academy Awards in Hollywood. …
Renée Zellweger wins best actress Oscar for Judy Renée Zellweger has won the best actress Oscar at the 92nd Academy Awards for her role as Judy Garland in the biopic of the singer and movie star. Zel …
Parasite's best picture Oscar could kickstart a new era of internationalism Something just bust out of the basement. Parasite’s stunning best picture Oscar win – the very first for a film wholly not in the English tongue – has …
Parasite's brilliant win is a portent of change in the conceited Hollywood club After years of upholding the values of mainstream-prestige dullness and having cultivated a habit of rewarding mediocrity and conformity, the Oscars h …
Joaquin Phoenix responds to best actor Oscar with impassioned speech Joker star Joaquin Phoenix has won the best actor Oscar at the 92nd Academy Awards, for his performance as Batman’s nemesis. Phoenix was the overwhelm …
'I've been a scoundrel all my life': quotes of the Oscars 2020 Chris Rock on Jeff Bezos and Marriage Story “Bezos is so rich, he got divorced and he is still the richest man in the world. He saw Marriage Story and …
'Like Halle Berry versus gum disease': nine things we learned at the 2020 Oscars Joaquin Phoenix went full vegan After Phoenix’s speech at the Baftas, in which he said that it was incumbent on the dominant culture to increase repre …
'We can make it here': Taika Waititi urges on Indigenous talent after Oscar win “I dedicate this to all the Indigenous kids all over the world who want to do art and dance and write stories,” said Taika Waititi, the New Zealand fi …
Neon demons: why comic-book movies are replacing grey with vibrant colour A new, more colourful era of comic-book movies beckons this year, with a slate of movies centred on female superheroes and directed by women, includin …
Joaquin Phoenix's Oscars speech casts him as Hollywood's poster boy of progress Ahead of Joker’s release, all the conversation around the film was about the harm it would cause, how it would encourage copycat violence and awaken a …
Parasite makes Oscars history as first foreign language winner of best picture Summary: After an awards season marked by its predictability, the Oscars delivered a spectacular final-reel twist on Sunday evening, naming capitalist satire P …
Les Vêpres Siciliennes review – theatricality and spectacle in Verdi's grand opera Giuseppe Verdi’s determination to conquer Paris with a grand opera that fulfilled the requisites of French convention just about paid off: its first p …
Grace Jones' Meltdown: Solange, Skunk Anansie and Lee Fields to play Grace Jones has announced the first wave of performers for her edition of the annual Meltdown festival, threading her lineage as a radical black woman …
Bob Marley at 75: how a ghetto reggae star rebranded Jamaica Summary: At 7am on 6 February, on what would have been Bob Marley’s 75th birthday, the abeng conch shell blows at his old home at uptown Kingston’s 56 Hope Roa …
Sigala review – one-man party-starter defies Storm Ciara with tropical show While heavy weather battered much of the UK, the conditions in Glasgow’s Barrowland Ballroom were defiantly tropical. Dance producer Bruce Fielder, AK …
Parasite review – a gasp-inducing masterpiece The ideal way to experience South Korean auteur Bong Joon-ho’s awards-garlanded, international box-office smash is with as little prior knowledge as p …
Brad Pitt wins best supporting actor Oscar and takes on Trump in speech Brad Pitt has won the best supporting actor Oscar for his role as Cliff Booth in Once Upon a Time in Hollywood at the 92nd Academy Awards. Pitt saw of …
OAE/Fischer review – a new shape for late Mozart Mozart wrote his last three symphonies during a few weeks, in a flurry of inspiration so concentrated that one might usefully think of them as a singl …
Oscar winners 2020: the full list Best supporting actor Tom Hanks, A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood Anthony Hopkins, The Two Popes Al Pacino, The Irishman Joe Pesci, The Irishman Br …
Korean cinema's global reach highlighted by Parasite's Oscar win The Oscar success of Parasite, which became the first foreign-language film to win best picture, might have taken UK-based Korean artists and film buf …
Claws out: Visual Effects Society slams Academy for Oscars dig at Cats After a skit ridiculing the special effects in the critically reviled flop Cats at last night’s Oscars, a catfight is now brewing between the Academy …
Virtuoso mourns beloved £150,000 piano smashed by movers A unique piano which was treasured by the Canadian virtuoso Angela Hewitt as her “best friend” was broken beyond repair when it was dropped by special …
How we made The Land That Time Forgot Summary: Kevin Connor, director Amicus were a kind of second-string Hammer Horror in the 1960s – my first film for them was From Beyond the Grave. By the 70s, …
LPO/Jurowski review – ingeniously celebrating Beethoven the revolutionary All music was once new music, as the London Philharmonic’s 2020 Vision series quietly reminds us. Ingeniously programmed, and running throughout the y …
Rage Against the Machine and Stormzy to headline Reading and Leeds festival Summary: Rage Against the Machine, Stormzy and Liam Gallagher have been announced as the headliners for 2020’s Reading and Leeds festival. Rage Against the Mac …
'Bless the chaos': La Movida Madrileña, Spain's seedy, wild post-Franco underground General Franco had been dead for a while before those he repressed in Spain felt brave enough to celebrate in public. The dictator’s four-decade rule …
Raphaël Coleman, Nanny McPhee star and climate activist, dies aged 25 Raphaël Coleman, a child actor who became a climate change activist, has died at the age of 25. Coleman’s death on Friday was reported by his mother, …
Marc Almond review – death and flutes in non-stop erotic cabaret ‘There’s never enough budget with these one-off things, so you just have to do what you can,” Marc Almond said ruefully during an interview with 6Musi …
Inversia: the Arctic music festival lighting up perpetual night Summary: In the Arctic Circle during the dim days of February, reality becomes a little attenuated. At 10am, it’s still dark, the streetlights colouring the pa …
'Elites v deplorables' thriller The Hunt to finally get release Controversial satire The Hunt, in which “elites” track and kill “deplorables”, will now be released after being pulled last year in the wake of of a s …
Friday singer Rebecca Black gets candid about teenage struggle: 'I was afraid of the world' The singer Rebecca Black has opened up about her struggle with depression following the release of her viral hit Friday nine years ago. In an emotiona …
Spycies review – awkward, eco-anxious kids' animation Here’s a manic, soulless animated kids’ caper, with a hug-a-hippo message for our eco-anxious times awkwardly bolted on. It’s a Chinese-French coprodu …
A female director Oscar? Three ways to fix film awards season Summary: History has been made. For the first time in the 92-year history of the Oscars, best picture has gone to a non-English language film. And Bong Joon-ho …
The 1975 commit to playing only gender-balanced music festivals Matt Healy, frontman of Brit award-winning band the 1975, has said the group will only perform at festivals with a gender-balanced lineup. Healy was r …
Parasite's box office figures surge after Oscar triumph Best picture winner Parasite has recorded spectacular audience figures in the wake of its Academy Awards triumph on Sunday. After the South Korean sat …
Blossoms review – chart-topping anti-lads get louche and loved up Stockport quintet Blossoms are quite the pop chameleons. They emerged in 2014 as a bob-cut, black-clad indie-psychedelic band, but by 2018 and their s …
Musical notes: Scorsese, Madonna, and the awfulness of millennium pop Summary: Inside a subversive history of music Alexis Petridis, chief rock and pop critic It was pure coincidence that I found myself reading Ted Gioia’s Music: …
Iceland SO/Tortelier review – anniversary tour finds bright tones and striking textures Many orchestras have a calling card, a work from their home country that they make sure to take with them on foreign tours. For the Iceland Symphony O …
OscarsSoExpensive: Academy museum goes $100m over budget The much-delayed Academy Museum of Motion Pictures has gone $100m over budget. The museum, which was supposed to open three years ago, will finally op …
Rose McGowan: Natalie Portman's Oscars dress protest 'deeply offensive' Activist and actor Rose McGowan has labelled Natalie Portman a “fraud” for wearing a dress to the Oscars embroidered with the names of female film-mak …
The Leunig Fragments review – portrait of the cartoonist is a quasi-poetic cop-out Watching the director Kasimir Burgess’ documentary about the veteran cartoonist Michael Leunig left me conflicted. I was impressed by several aspects …
Sonic the Hedgehog review – dastardly Jim Carrey gives Sonic the blues Sonic the Hedgehog’s big Hollywood entrance was swiftly followed by undignified retreat last year, when the first trailer for this movie prompted onli …
Common scents: how Parasite puts smell at the heart of class war You can’t hide from smell in Parasite. It’s oppressive. It clings to you, seeping into your skin. It is omnipresent and sinister. Beyond being a mere …
Mad Max at 40: how the low-budget original remains a film-making feat “A few years from now …” reads the title card that opens George Miller’s Mad Max, and that’s it. How did we get to this dystopian wasteland in so shor …
First Love review – brilliantly bizarre, ultra-violent yakuza caper Japan’s maestro of pulp Takashi Miike is approaching his 60th birthday (this August) and, far from slowing down, remains fanatically prolific. Here is …
Why James Corden and Rebel Wilson should have stuck up for Cats Rebel Wilson and James Corden have got whiskers bristling with their gag at the Oscars on Sunday night, when they appeared as their characters from To …
Slowthai in altercation at NME awards and harasses host Katherine Ryan Slowthai has been involved in an altercation at the NME awards, and has been criticised for his behaviour towards host Katherine Ryan. After being tau …
Jihad Jane review – the women seduced by terrorism ‘She seemed like a normal country girl.” That’s Kurt speaking, ex-boyfriend of Jihad Jane, a blond, blue-eyed woman from suburban Philadelphia, real n …
Rose McGowan's attack on Natalie Portman was a welcome cuff in an age of cuddles There are flies in the ointment right now who are irritated by Rose McGowan. There are flies out there who are saying to one another: “Can’t she just …
Eminent Monsters: A Manual for Modern Torture review – the cycle of shame If there is another terrorist attack in Britain, one of the interviewees suggests in this documentary by Scottish director Stephen Bennett, then the U …
'I want to scream when I hear The Specials': readers on the songs they can't listen to any more The flatmate’s alarm … The Specials – Ghost Town Third year at university, the bloke I was flat sharing with played Ghost Town by The Specials every m …
John Boorman: 'You think the holy grail is lost? No. I have it on my piano' Summary: Last summer, John Boorman embarked on what may prove to be his final film production. The location was the garden of his big house in Ireland. The cas …
Rick Moranis to make Honey I Shrunk the Kids reboot after 23-year break Rick Moranis, the Canadian actor and comic who made a high-profile screen career in the 1980s and 90s playing bespectacled nerds in a string of films …
Stormzy postpones Asian tour due to coronavirus Summary: Stormzy has postponed the Asian leg of his Heavy Is the Head world tour due to coronavirus. The south London rap star wrote on Twitter: “I was serious …
Sibelius: Symphonies 4 & 6 review – grandeur, warmth and flashes of exuberance completes cycle Summary: It has taken Mark Elder and the Hallé more than a decade to complete their survey of the Sibelius symphonies. In bringing together the two most enigma …
‘It’s probably fear’: why Eddy Current Suppression Ring ran away from fame Last December, Eddy Current Suppression Ring, the beloved garage-rock four-piece from Melbourne, released their first album in a decade. It was knowin …
Embroidered capes aside, here's how to support female film-makers There was plenty of fury at the usual lack of female representation at the Oscars and Baftas this year, but how does that translate into positive chan …
Billie Eilish: No Time to Die review – a Bond theme befitting the Craig era James Bond was a bit of a mouldy fig when it came to music. There weren’t many things worse, he opined in Goldfinger, than “listening to the Beatles w …
Justin Bieber: Changes review – the sound of fame being shunned Connoisseurs of documentaries that reveal the full horror of becoming famous – particularly at a young age – are currently spoilt for choice. Over on …
Happy never after? The enduring appeal of the messy marriage movie Q: When is a comedy about romance not a romantic comedy? A: When it focuses on a married couple. American audiences can find a case in point this week …
Pone: the paralysed producer making music with his eyes Summary: Interviewing an artist who can’t speak is an unusual, almost meditative experience. I am in a small town outside Toulouse in south-western France to m …
DJ Diaki: Balani Fou review – landslide of rhythms brings Africa to the dancefloor Recent years have seen some of the most exciting dancefloor-focused music moving further and further away from its spiritual homes of Detroit, Chicago …
Ghost review – Patrick Swayze's immortal meditation on love and grief Veteran producer-screenwriter Bruce Joel Rubin created a comfort-food weepie classic with his gem Ghost, the story of a murdered young man who sticks …
Tame Impala: The Slow Rush review – a stunning explosion of heartfelt pop Tame Impala, AKA 34-year-old Australian Kevin Parker, started out in 2010 as a home-recording, guitar-wielding psychedelic rocker, but 2015’s Currents …
Katie Gately: Loom review – nightmarish orchestrated despair Summary: A nail-bomb of grief explodes in this second album by US musician Katie Gately, trauma seeming to rip open its edges. It was written while her mother …
Lana Condor: 'People are saying they feel seen in these films' Four days after Netflix released To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before in 2018, someone – whose identity is still unclear – leaked its star’s phone number …
Nathaniel Rateliff: And It's Still Alright review – a mixed bag of Americana Nathaniel Rateliff had been around the houses before people started taking notice: an album apiece with Lost in the Flood and his own group, the Wheel …
Moses Boyd: Dark Matter review – dancefloor-friendly kaleidoscopic jazz from UK drummer Summary: Drummer Moses Boyd has always been a difficult musician to pin down. Half of the fiercely propulsive free jazz duo Binker and Moses, he was heralded a …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Sam Smith, Pussycat Dolls, EOB Sam Smith To Die For Previously, you could tell how sad a new Sam Smith song was going to be by the accompanying coat. Black blazer? Mid-paced tear-je …
The Lost Boys review – a bloody, ingenious reflection on youth This sprightly and satirical 80s spin on JM Barrie’s “lost boys” from director Joel Schumacher is now rereleased in UK cinemas. Screenwriter Jeffrey B …
Joseph Shabalala obituary Joseph Shabalala, who has died aged 78, was the founder, leader and musical director of Ladysmith Black Mambazo, the most popular vocal group Africa h …
Move over, Rosalía – fado is the new flamenco Summary: For a few glorious moments at the end of January, downtown Los Angeles was enveloped by a whirlwind of Iberian fervour, as Catalan singer Rosalía brou …
The real star of Bong Joon-ho’s Oscar-winner Parasite? The house Pretty much every actor in Parasite puts in a note-perfect performance, but as the film unfolds there’s no doubting the star of the show. The house wh …
Caped crusader: who is the real target of Natalie Portman's reply to Rose McGowan? It’s hard to predict what the big stories from Oscar night will turn out to be. Parasite’s victory was a slight surprise – but not an earth-shaker. My …
Streaming: To All the Boys: PS I Still Love You – the longed-for sequel lands Netflix’s latest awards-film cycle finally wrapped up last week, having yielded an Oscar apiece for Marriage Story and the exceptional documentary Ame …
‘I appreciate humanity now’: King Krule on punk, parenthood and finding peace Some time towards the end of 2019, Archy Marshall, AKA King Krule, found himself in Warrington standing on a wide stretch of ankle-high grass. Behind …
Jessie Ware: ‘Music was my bread and butter. Now it isn’t, which is more enjoyable' You can tell a true-born foodie by their urgency around a menu, and when the musician Jessie Ware meets me for lunch it is at a Middle Eastern restaur …
The week in classical: Les vêpres siciliennes; Luisa Miller review – a passion for patriarchy Fathers and sons, fathers and daughters. When Verdi gets a thing about dads you know it will not end well. New productions of Verdi’s lesser-known wor …
Tame Impala: The Slow Rush review – polished disco funk Around the time of 2015’s Currents – the third Tame Impala album – mainman Kevin Parker described having an epiphany some time previously. Driving aro …
One to watch: Angelica Garcia “Enough with the Cadillacs and the Hampton estates,” snarls Angelica Garcia on It Don’t Hinder Me, an arresting whirlwind of a track that sounds like …
Blond ambition: the rise and rise of Johnny Flynn, a man for all seasons Being a fictional hero was once a more straightforward business. You were handsome, you were honourable and brave: you were in. Colin Firth only had t …
When Lambs Become Lions review – eagle eye on the ivory trade “I never do the killing myself. I don’t like killing,” insists ivory poacher “X” in Jon Kasbe’s visually striking documentary about Kenya’s illegal iv …
Seth Lakeman: A Pilgrim’s Tale review – all aboard the Mayflower Summary: The actual 400th anniversary of the Mayflower’s setting sail from Plymouth for America isn’t until September, but Devon-born Seth Lakeman is in early …
Home listening: Howard Skempton piano works and more • Howard Skempton’s 24 Preludes and Fugues for piano, performed by William Howard (Orchid Classics), for whom they were written, take inspiration from …
First Love review – a bloody slice of Tokyo pulp fiction Less than three minutes into Takashi Miike’s First Love, a severed head rolls into an alleyway, eyes wide open and blinking in shock. Eye-popping is o …
Sonic the Hedgehog review – running to a standstill All publicity is not good publicity, as the team behind the live-action Sonic the Hedgehog discovered when the film’s trailer was released in April 20 …
Emma review – Austen's sweet satire gets a multiplex makeover With its heady mix of social satire, romantic intrigue and endlessly reinterpretable gender politics, Jane Austen’s 1815 novel Emma has long proved ca …
Moses Boyd: Dark Matter review – party-facing solo debut Summary: Moses Boyd is a drummer in the same way Questlove from the Roots is a drummer, which is to say that the twice Mobo-winning 28-year-old Londoner is a p …
Parasite: how Oscar triumph has exposed South Korea’s social divide Few would begrudge South Koreans their moment of joy after Parasite’s historic success at the Oscars. Not only was Bong Joon-ho’s film the first non-E …
Spycies review – not so perfect spies This simplistic animated feature produced by the Chinese streaming platform iQiyi centres on top-tier spy cat Vladimir (Kirk Thornton), who finds hims …
James Blunt review – beige balladeer turns up the self-deprecating charm Summary: Having a global smash as couple-friendly as You’re Beautiful would often cast a singer-songwriter as gooey but wearily earnest “serious artist”. But J …
Justin Bieber: Changes review – mid-tempo wedded bliss Nothing frames a pop album quite like a redemption narrative, and for Justin Bieber this is his second in a row. While 2015’s Purpose, preceded by pro …
Beach Bunny: Honeymoon review – a short, sweet blast of sunny indie-pop What began in 2015 as a bedroom project for Chicago-based Lili Trifilio had become something of an online phenomenon by the time 2018’s self-released …
‘I was a bad influence on the Beatles': James Taylor on Lennon, love and recovery James Taylor looks out at the sprawling London skyline. “This is where it started,” he says. “The moment.” He made his first trip here in 1968, playin …
Immense. Harrowing. Exhilarating: pianist Igor Levit on Beethoven's sonatas Opus 2, No 2. The early A major sonata. Four movements with some 23 minutes of music. Surely one of the young Beethoven’s finest and most ingenious cr …
Greed is ... good? Why Hollywood can't make its mind up about billionaires Greed is not good in Greed. Director Michael Winterbottom’s new satire shows us wealth in all its vanity, venality and vulgarity, as flaunted by Steve …
Built on rock: the geology at the heart of Oscars sensation Parasite Summary: When Bong Joon-ho made movie history by winning a clutch of Oscars for Parasite, he held the statuettes together afterwards, making them kiss. There i …
Andrew Weatherall, British producer behind Screamadelica, dies aged 56 Andrew Weatherall, the British musician, DJ and record producer known for helming Primal Scream’s Screamadelica, has died aged 56. His management wrot …
Andrew Weatherall: lone swordsman who cut new shapes for British music Summary: There was a point, quite early on in Andrew Weatherall’s career, when vast commercial success appeared to beckon him. Already an acclaimed DJ and remi …
LSO/Rattle review – volatile, politically charged Berg and Beethoven When Schiller addressed his Ode to Joy to “you millions” rather than the privileged few, he made it political. Beethoven’s setting of it as the last m …
Banoffee on trauma and transformation: 'Reshaping myself helped me survive' Summer sunlight filters through a large gumtree in her family’s backyard, as Martha Brown’s dog Story cruises for pats. It’s an idyllic scene, but for …
'A wonderfully creative DJ': readers' tributes to Andrew Weatherall ‘A really important artist for a whole generation of Brits’ Damn, I really can’t believe this … Weatherall deeply impacted me, my life course and, of …
Rogue colons, endless ellipses: the worst grammar crimes in film titles mother! In “the most Darren Aronofsky thing of all time”, the director decided on having the exclamation mark at the end of the title of his 2017 film …
Brit awards 2020: who will win every award … and who should Group of the year Coldplay Foals Bring Me the Horizon D-Block Europe Bastille Speaking from the venal, artistically disinterested, industry-beancounte …
Ozzy Osbourne cancels US tour due to ongoing ill health Ozzy Osbourne has cancelled his North American tour to undergo treatment amid a continuing period of poor health. A statement on his website says the …
Rose McGowan says she regrets Natalie Portman Oscars dress comments Rose McGowan has expressed regret for her attack on Natalie Portman over the latter’s Oscar dress “protest”, which took aim at the exclusion of women …
Trust your nose: what rich people can learn from Parasite Now that Parasite is everywhere, sweeping the Oscars and cleaning up at the box office, perhaps it’s time to stop and think about the film itself. Par …
Andrew Weatherall: 10 of his greatest tracks Primal Scream – Loaded (1990) No matter how many dodgy rootin-tootin’ singles or car-crash gigs they get through, Primal Scream have limitless goodwil …
Andrew Weatherall obituary Summary: The list of Andrew Weatherall’s achievements as DJ, musician, songwriter, producer and remixer could fill a hefty volume. His career took him from wor …
Västerås Sinfonietta/Crawford-Phillips review – a force of nature A programme whose theme was the force that is nature was all too apt for a weekend when storms were tyrannical. Under their chief conductor, Simon Cra …
Drill rapper Unknown T cleared of murder of student Unknown T, until recently one of the brightest prospects in the UK drill scene, has been cleared of murdering a university student at New Year’s Eve p …
Brit awards 2020: Lewis Capaldi tops winners alongside rap triumphs Scottish singer-songwriter Lewis Capaldi has topped the winners at the 2020 Brit awards, though a strong year for rap music prevented a clean sweep of …
Coming soon: £150m Hollywood-style film studios to Reading A US movie studio group behind blockbusters including Venom, Jumanji and Godzilla is to build a £150m Hollywood-style production complex in Reading, c …
Brit awards 2020: the winners and performances as they happened Summary: The era of #BritsSoWhite is long gone: with awards for Stormzy, Mabel and Dave, black British talent is finally getting the credit it deserves – and n …
Brits 2020: all the performances reviewed Mabel The Brits’ sole British female nominee in the mixed categories – for shame! – opens the show in some Timbalands and pink workwear, like she’s of …
Politics and powerful performances at the 2020 Brits – but no shock winners Summary: The row about female representation at the Brits was rumbling on unabated in the lead-up to the awards ceremony. The most recent contributions include …
Harry Styles 'threatened with knife during Valentine's Day mugging' Singer Harry Styles was reportedly mugged at knifepoint in London on Valentine’s Day. The 26-year old former One Direction member was “threatened with …
Dave attacks Boris Johnson in Brit awards performance: 'Our prime minister's a real racist' Summary: South London rapper Dave has accused Boris Johnson of being a racist on stage at the 2020 Brit awards. Performing Black, a freestyle track that charts …
Midnight Family review – an alarming look at Mexico's ambulance cowboys Were it not for the real-life tragedy and horror involved, this documentary could almost be a bleak and often hilarious black comedy. Film-maker Luke …
Ut review – post-punk brutalists retain their stark, soulful power Veterans of a mid-80s underground scene that raised atonal, oppressive noise to a vital artform, Ut have retained their ability to unsettle and inspir …
Pearl Carr obituary Summary: In 1959 the husband and wife duo of Pearl Carr and Teddy Johnson were invited to look at songs with which they could represent the UK in the fourth st …
What do female film-makers have to say about male stories? When Ana Kokkinos found out her second film was going to be shown at Cannes in 1998, she was overjoyed. Charting 24 hedonistic hours in the life of a …
The Public review – quiet showdown in the library A lot of very big guns are wheeled on to make a weirdly muffled and underwhelming bang in this stately, high-minded feature from Emilio Estevez, shot …
Pop star, producer or pariah? The conflicted brilliance of Grimes Grimes has always had a tortured relationship with visibility. No sooner had Claire Boucher broken beyond the Montreal warehouse scene at the turn of …
Incidental Characters review – muddling along, looking for love Benjamin Verrall’s film is a quirky, low-key but basically underpowered British indie set in Lewes, East Sussex, and although it never quite came aliv …
Cate Blanchett on global politics and immigration detention: 'You're living in a system that's gone mad' As an Australian working abroad, Cate Blanchett never found it easy talking about her home government – in particular, the trauma it has inflicted on …
'Dear God, please send me to hell': Derek Jarman prints sold in fundraiser If there were a choice, Derek Jarman implored God, then could he please go to hell. And if the almighty insisted on reincarnation then “please promise …
Dave hailed for Brit awards protest against 'racist' Boris Johnson It has been described as “the most important performance in the history of the Brits” and “a necessary wake-up call in the most provocative way”. Afte …
In My Blood It Runs review – quietly masterful portrait of growing up Indigenous The defining image imprinted on to my mind after watching director Maya Newell’s excellent film In My Blood It Runs is of a child – its 10-year-old su …
End of the Century review – post-coital reverie of sex, love and memory End of the Century, from first-time director Lucio Castro, is a post-coital reverie of a movie, a musingly light meditation on sex, love, monogamy and …
My Hero Academia: Heroes Rising review – workies save the world Summary: A second feature-length outing for the popular shonen (teenage boys) anime from Tokyo’s Bones studio, Heroes Rising milks the 21st-century superhero f …
Ben Affleck's Batman was hard to like – but the man himself deserves some empathy Summary: There seem to be two essential prisms through which to view the celebrity star suffering in the spotlight. The first is the cynical tabloid editor’s p …
Waiting for Anya review – soapy second world war melodrama Summary: There is something melodramatic and soapy about this glossy adaptation of Michael Morpurgo’s second world war novel for children, the story of a Frenc …
The Strokes review – New York's ultimate hipsters set the crowd alight A few years back, GQ magazine ran a feature headlined “The fifteen-year decline of the Strokes”, outlining the ways the New York quintet had disappoin …
'Love and free food': Mel Brooks and Carl Reiner share the secrets of their 70-year friendship Every evening, Mel Brooks leaves his home in Santa Monica, gets in his car and stares down Los Angeles’ notorious rush-hour traffic to go to Carl Rein …
Tintoretto: A Rebel in Venice review – the rock'n'roll Renaissance master? Trying just a bit too hard to get some rock-star glamour to rub off on what’s a quintessentially high-brow package, this documentary about the Venetia …
Eminem: his 30 greatest tracks, ranked! 30. Rap God (2013) Eminem illustrates all the cadences he has mastered over the years, channelling flows from influences such as Tech N9ne and Big Pun …
Stormzy receives first Greggs ‘black card’ handing him free pastries for life He had the first UK No 1 of the decade and was named best male artist at the Brit awards this week. But now Stormzy may have clinched the ultimate acc …
Bezuidenhout: Beethoven Piano Concertos 2 and 5 review – boisterous and charming Summary: Hopefully you are not sick of Beethoven yet in his 250th anniversary year, because there are plenty of recordings to come that you might not have real …
The Brit awards have become a platform for black politics – and brilliance The Brits are no stranger to protest or political statement: the 1996 ceremony contained both, with Jarvis Cocker driven to moon Michael Jackson over …
‘It feels like an extra limb’ – musicians on the bond with their instruments Summary: One thing successful musicians have to do a lot of is travel, and when you travel with an instrument, you increase its chances of getting damaged. Ear …
That not-so-old black magic: how African mysticism returned to pop In west Africa, juju, also known as black magic, is the indigenous belief system in the ability of the spiritual world to impact on the physical one. …
My Salinger Year review – bafflingly insipid Berlin opener clunks hard There’s an unfortunate tradition at Berlin of beginning with a film that clunks hard enough to smash concrete. So it has proved with this bafflingly i …
Céline Sciamma: 'In France, they don’t find the film hot. They think it lacks flesh, it’s not erotic' Céline Sciamma’s Portrait of a Lady on Fire should carry a health warning: “This film may cause uncontrollable swooning.” Everywhere the French direct …
United Nation: Three Decades of Drum & Bass review – a raving nostalgia trip Summary: Here’s a reasonably entertaining film about the history of drum’n’bass co-directed by club scene entrepreneur Terry “Turbo” Stone, a man (apparently) …
The Orielles: the hotly tipped band leaving Halifax for the stars Twenty minutes into the gong bath, Orielles vocalist and bassist Esmé Hand-Halford knew that she was ready to do her vocal take. Stockport’s Eve Studi …
Pulled By Magnets: Rose Golden Doorways review – an ear-tricking blizzard of sound Seb Rochford is best known as leader of the post-jazz outfit Polar Bear and co-founder of the punk-jazzers Acoustic Ladyland, as well as being a found …
Ozzy Osbourne: Ordinary Man review – his final statement? Given his recent tribulations – notably his diagnosis with Parkinson’s – it’s hardly surprising that there is a sometimes elegiac feel to Ozzy Osbourn …
Donald Trump jabs at Parasite's Oscar win because film is 'from South Korea' Summary: Donald Trump has taken a jab at the Oscars for awarding this year’s best picture honor to Parasite, because the film is South Korean. “How bad were th …
Sightless Pit: Grave of a Dog review – witchy trio unleash hell Summary: ‘When shall we three meet again in thunder, lightning or in rain?” That’s what you can imagine this decidedly witchy trio saying to each other after f …
King Krule: Man Alive! review – disgust, dissolution and despair King Krule, AKA 25-year-old south London native Archy Marshall, has always let his work sprawl. His 2013 debut, 6 Feet Beneath the Moon, was a stagger …
Malmkrog review – cerebral period drama lives on in the mind Summary: Cristi Puiu is the film-maker who spearheaded Romanian new wave 15 years ago with his brilliant The Death of Mr Lazarescu, and then five years later w …
Tracks of the week reviewed: US Girls, Jake Shears, Grimes US Girls 4 American Dollars In a comparison of the presidential candidates’ campaign rally playlists, the progressive Bernie Sanders came off unusuall …
Supergrass review – joyous return for one of the UK's greatest singles bands One quality among many that defines Supergrass is their sense of humour. Note that the title track from their second and arguably best album, 1997’s I …
Everything we wanted: the race to find the next Billie Eilish Last week, Billie Eilish released her masterfully mournful Bond theme, No Time to Die – a huge swoop of a song that wants to bottle a feeling of timel …
Joaquin Phoenix saves cow and calf from slaughterhouse Summary: Few would have anticipated the most memorable line from this year’s Oscars would involve the artificial insemination of cattle. But Joaquin Phoenix’s …
Brahms: The Boy II review – wilfully unscary evil doll horror Watching Brahms: The Boy II, an awkwardly titled and staggeringly incompetent sequel to a film no one remembers, one’s mind will wander. After giving …
'Diversity is now centre stage': Berlin film festival sets industry precedent Summary: The Berlin film festival has achieved gender parity in some of its most senior positions a year after signing a pledge that commits film festivals to …
Minamata review – Johnny Depp attempts redemption in heartfelt look at disaster that struck Japanese town Minamata is not a masterpiece and there are one or two cliches here about western saviours and boozy, difficult, passionate journalists who occupy the …
Hidden Away review - makes a rich, heavy meal of a biopic of feral Italian painter Giorgio Diritti has directed a lovely-looking and fervent film about the life of the 20th-century naive artist Antonio Ligabue, who suffered poverty a …
Streaming: where to find Joan Didion gems Summary: There are certain novels that get widely branded by critics as “unfilmable” – usually only after someone has gone to the trouble of trying to film the …
Nixon in China review –  a gripping human drama Ask a Chinese person, or one trusted to speak to tourists, about the current status of Mao Zedong – founder of the People’s Republic of China, propone …
One to watch: Kamaiyah Back in 2016, the California rapper Kamaiyah released one of the most exciting debut mixtapes of the year. A Good Night in the Ghetto put the then sec …
The Murder Capital review – people really need this band Something is happening to boys in bands up and down the country and across the Irish Sea. They are singing about things that matter, such as mental he …
Midnight Family review – superb documentary on Mexico’s private ambulances Summary: There’s a twilight zone that the Ochoa family, the subjects of this superb observational documentary, inhabit. It’s a very dirty grey area situated so …
Pop music needs a new kick up the arse, says the Damned’s punk pioneer It was the first punk single, a tune that influenced a generation of young people disaffected by early 70s manufactured pop and rock. Now the man who …
First Cow review – Kelly Reichardt’s superbly chewy tale of milk cakes in the old west Kelly Reichardt gives us a terrifically tough and sinewy tale of the old west, shaped by the brutally implacable market forces of capitalism. She and …
The Salt of Tears review - classy-looking French love story that jumps the shark Veteran film-maker Philippe Garrel gives us a new movie in the classic black-and-white Parisian style, co-written by him with two titans of the French …
Kill It and Leave This Town review - gaunt beauty amid the smoky smudge of memory Summary: Critical discussion of animation has recently turned on comparing the Disney and Pixar traditions with that of Studio Ghibli in Japan, and the very di …
Clint Eastwood: electing Bloomberg would make my day Summary: Clint Eastwood has backed Mike Bloomberg for president, breaking with the Republican party he has supported for decades and even served in elected off …
Day on the Green review: a-ha return with a melancholy take on their 80s hits Summary: The Norwegian band a-ha first toured Australia in 1986, appearing to adoring teenage fans on Countdown. As with international acts such as ABBA and Ma …
Greed review – Steve Coogan entertains in broad satire It could be said that writer and director Michael Winterbottom and star Steve Coogan have created a monster in the character of fashion mogul Sir Rich …
Home listening: Bach, Haydn, Mozart and more • In nearly half a century since the Belgian conductor Philippe Herreweghe began performing Bach’s St John Passion (in the earliest performances he sh …
‘It was so emotional’: the duo who helped rapper Dave stun the Brits Amber Rimell and Bronski were in their studio when a call came through last December. The 21-year-old rapper, Dave, had been asked to perform at the B …
The Call of the Wild review – a remake with little bite Summary: Jack London’s 1903 Yukon-set adventure novel has been adapted for screen on numerous occasions. Various versions have starred, among others, Clark Gab …
Little Joe review – The Day of the Triffids meets Little Shop of Horrors In Danse Macabre, his piercing analysis of the horror genre, Stephen King cites a key moment of uncanny weirdness from Jack Finney’s 1955 novel The Bo …
Mel C speaks out: trying to be the perfect Spice Girl made me ill Melanie Chisholm, the former Spice Girl Mel C, dates her past struggle with eating disorders and depression back to an incident at a Brit awards cerem …
Bobby Gillespie remembers Andrew Weatherall: ‘He was a true bohemian’ Summary: I first heard of Andrew Weatherall back in the summer of 1989, when he wrote about his favourite tracks of the time in the Boy’s Own fanzine. To our s …
Supergrass: ‘We’ve always been about manic energy’ In a way, it’s incredible that Supergrass lasted as long as they did. That they survived the mania of Britpop having bounced into mainstream conscious …
Like a Boss review – corporate comedy with little to laugh about There’s something uniquely dispiriting about a film that manages to waste the considerable talents of almost everybody involved, both in front of and …
‘You’re one of the more normal composers’: Simon Rattle and Thomas Adès swap notes One titan in the room is a challenge. A pair threatens to be a crush. Classical music has many stars. Yet true creative thinkers, who mould the cultur …
Michael Ball and Alfie Boe review – dulcet bromance hits the high notes Michael Ball and Alfie Boe’s business is booming. The stage veterans, who first met in 2007 during an unloved ENO production of Kismet, know a thing o …
King Krule: Man Alive! review – stirring, dreamy optimism Archy Marshall has been refining his woozy, washed-out sounds since he emerged back in 2010. With each release under his King Krule moniker, he has sh …
Subscribers to multiple streaming services more likely to also be online pirates: survey The more subscription film and TV services Australians have signed up to, the more likely they are to continue to download pirated content, according …
Pinocchio review - wooden-puppet fairytale goes back to the sweet-sour original There is something rich and strange and generous in Matteo Garrone’s new live-action version of the Pinocchio story, for which the director and his co …
Oscar-bait no more: why serious-issue dramas are floundering Dark Waters must be the least Todd Haynes film Todd Haynes has ever made. Based on the true story of a corporate lawyer (played by Mark Ruffalo) who s …
Gürzenich O Köln/Roth review – inventive and compelling Beethoven tribute There are more than 10 months still to go, but if anyone comes up with a more inventive way of celebrating Beethoven’s 250th anniversary year than Fra …
Total Immersion: Anders Hillborg review – deep dive into a demanding and fascinating body of work ‘I write pieces because fantastic musicians ask me to,” Anders Hillborg told the audience, with disarming charm, at the first concert of the BBC Symph …
The Script review – stadium rock at its most cliched Irish trio the Script were Los Angeles-based songwriters for Britney Spears and Boyz II Men before the 2008 international smash The Man Who Can’t Be M …
Justin Bieber breaks US chart record held by Elvis Presley Justin Bieber has broken a US chart record set by Elvis Presley 59 years ago, by becoming the youngest artist to score seven No 1 albums. Bieber, 25, …
These New Puritans review – frustratingly unfinished symphonies As restless souls with voracious creative appetites, These New Puritans’ previous appearances at the Barbican saw their ranks bolstered by children’s …
Hillary review – did the US presidential hopeful take the wrong road? There is a melancholy fascination to Nanette Burstein’s sympathetic and respectful documentary interview with the enduringly opaque Hillary Rodham Cli …
Lost in translation: when film-makers hit the language barrier It is a truth universally acknowledged in world cinema that a celebrated auteur, making their first film outside their native tongue, must be preparin …
'Selling it would be like removing part of my soul': readers on the bond with their instruments ‘I fell in love with her at first sight’ Pearl, my Epiphone FT- 150 jumbo steel string guitar is what I’d rescue first from a fire. She’s the only ins …
Elizabeth Cook obituary Elizabeth Cook, who has died aged 81, was a music teacher of particular energy, intelligence and empathy. As head of music at Tapton secondary school, …
'Taika Naptiti': director Waititi endorses Twitter thread paying homage to his snoozing Summary: The New Zealand director Taika Waititi has made one superfan’s day after personally endorsing a Twitter account that collects pictures of him napping. …
The Invisible Man review – Elisabeth Moss brings murky thriller to life While some would argue that the worst thing to have spawned from Marvel’s extended cinematic universe is an overreliance on the superhero genre in gen …
Director Richard Stanley: 'A coven of witches was using my house. They left a bit of a mess' Extraordinary stories tumble out of Richard Stanley’s mouth – absurdist adventures from far-off lands, anecdotes involving ghosts and warlocks – all d …
The Angel Esmeralda review –  slender DeLillo fable fails to take operatic flight Lliam Paterson’s The Angel Esmeralda was commissioned by Scottish Opera while he was its young composer in residence. But why it’s now receiving its w …
NHKSO/Gabetta/Järvi review – spirited Schumann and driving Takemitsu Summary: Paavo Järvi’s first European tour with Tokyo’s NHK Symphony Orchestra, three years ago, featured sensitively played Takemitsu and driven, exciting Mah …
Opera's rising star: Lise Davidsen on learning to handle the high life I’m pretty sure the man who’s very politely shunting Lise Davidsen out of our Royal Opera House interview room to make way for an audit meeting doesn’ …
Miss Fisher and the Crypt of Tears review – Essie Davis delights in hokey, lustreless film For those unacquainted with ABC’s hit whodunnit series Miss Fisher’s Murder Mysteries, based on author Kerry Greenwood’s detective novels and set in 1 …
Push review – searing study of the global housing crisis Don’t blame gentrification for pushing the poor out of inner cities. That’s the message of this plausible investigative documentary from Swedish journ …
David Roback: hallucinatory guitarist still sending pop into a dream To the outside world at least, the late David Roback was a wilfully mysterious figure. He appeared to hate talking about himself. The journalists who …
Todd Haynes: 'People who say Trump is bound to win are letting it happen' When Todd Haynes was promoting his glam-rock fantasy Velvet Goldmine in 1998, he knew exactly what he wanted. “We have a very modest goal for this fil …
Mick Fleetwood review – rousing all-star celebration of Peter Green Mick Fleetwood has enjoyed a long and impressive career, though this is surely one of the highlights. A tall, bearded figure, he sits behind his drum …
In Search of Chopin review – the composer with 'a gift from God' Summary: Rereleased as part of special screenings for all of director Phil Grabsky’s Great Composer series, this 2014 documentary is a studious, attentive resu …
Duffy has made peace. But social media won't let her Summary: Duffy’s statement regarding her horrific sexual assault was striking not only for its bravery, but for being so direct. This was a radically unfiltere …
Vivarium review – the unspeakable horror of settling down in suburbia There’s a type of film you could call burbstruck: horrified and yet sort of fascinated by the blank, bland, affectless sprawl of the suburbs in all th …
DAU. Natasha review – an exquisitely sinister study of Soviet oppression Summary: On its own terms, DAU. Natasha is a brutally queasy and stark picture of the life of a fictional woman who works in the staff canteen of a Stalin-era …
Color Out of Space review – Nicolas Cage goes cosmic in freaky sci-fi horror In the bonkers 2018 thriller Mandy, Nicolas Cage gave one of his Cage-iest performances yet, face splattered in blood as he pursued a cult leader who’ …
David Cronenberg: 'Movies were made for sex' Walter, the character played by David Cronenberg in Albert Shin’s new horror-thriller Disappearance at Clifton Hill, gets an introduction befitting th …
Dark Waters review – Todd Haynes plumbs the depths of a poisoning scandal Todd Haynes is such a distinctive authorial voice in American cinema, a genius from left field, notably addressing identity and sexuality, and with an …
James Newman: My Last Breath – UK Eurovision 2020 entry is serviceably bland Only a demented optimist doesn’t feel a sense of hopelessness overwhelm them as the UK’s entry for Eurovision 2020 appears. In fairness to James Newma …
Jay-Z files second lawsuit against 'barbaric' Mississippi prison Jay-Z has filed a civil lawsuit against the Mississippi Department of Corrections on behalf of 152 inmates at a state prison, alleging “barbaric” cond …
Sleater-Kinney review – versatile guitar heroes reach perfection The creative reinvention Sleater-Kinney undertook when joining forces with producer Annie Clark (AKA high conceptualist St Vincent) for their ninth al …
Can Taika Waititi get Deadpool to grow up and join the Marvel gang? Successfully integrating Deadpool into the Marvel Cinematic Universe may be the most challenging task faced by Kevin Feige in his 13 years running the …
Earl Cave: 'I can do angsty teenager but I think I was pretty pleasant' Summary: Earl Cave’s first onscreen appearance was in the 2014 music documentary 20,000 Days on Earth: Earl and his twin, Arthur, are sitting at home in school …
Caribou: Suddenly review – perfectly imperfect pop Some artists’ careers seem to progress according to a carefully calculated plan, and there are others whose career seems to progress as a result of ha …
Cracking the whip: who should direct Indiana Jones 5 now that Spielberg is out? Yesterday’s surprise announcement that Steven Spielberg is stepping away from the director’s chair for Indiana Jones 5 was met with shock, disappointm …
Dare to say his name: Candyman trailer reveals gore and gentrification A sequel to Candyman, doubling up as a reinvention, is heading to cinemas this summer from Oscar-winning producer Jordan Peele, with the first trailer …
LPO/Vänskä review – understated dexterity meets energy and fire The centrepiece of Osmo Vänskä’s first concert in the London Philharmonic’s 2020 Vision series was Louis Spohr’s rarely heard Second Violin Concerto, …
Charlatan review – a fascinating, frustrating tale of bottled-up emotion Summary: Only last year at Berlin, Agnieszka Holland presented Mr Jones: a big, brashly ambitious movie inspired by the life of Welsh journalist Gareth Jones, …
Hidden figure: how The Invisible Man preys on real-world female fears There’s a scene in the first half of The Invisible Man, a psychological horror film that reinvents the HG Wells character as an abusive ex-turned-stal …
Dan Sultan charged with indecent assault by Victoria police Musician Dan Sultan has cancelled all of his upcoming performances after he was charged with indecent assault by Victoria police. The blues and rock s …
Halsey, pop's new firebrand: 'Nobody wants to be my friend. I'm drama by association' There are two security gates protecting Halsey’s home in the winding hills of Los Angeles. You clear the first, then you wait as the next is released …
Myrkur: Folkesange review – Danish black metaller makes dense, intense folk Plait-wearing girls knitting on mountaintops don’t usually feature on the albums of black metal artists, unless they’re shot in stark monochrome and l …
Soccer Mommy: Color Theory review – grief and depression given glorious voice Summary: Many people who have had to contend with depression will recognise little truths leaping out at them from the second album by Sophie Allison, under th …
Vladislav Delay: Rakka review – techno from the end of the world Summary: Most people tend to start out angry at injustice in the world, and then have that anger pared down by the passage of time until they’re playing golf a …
Peter Bogdanovich: 'I missed my chance to tell Buster Keaton he was a genius – now I'm telling the world' Summary: I must have been six or seven when I first saw Buster Keaton. We were living in New York, and my father took me to the Museum of Modern Art in New Yor …
The Orielles: Disco Volador review – taking cosmic pop to new galaxies Summary: British music fans have an insatiable appetite for cosmic indie pop. Broadcast, Stereolab and the Beta Band infused it with rich sociopolitical ideas …
Haleek Maul: Errol review – rapper rattles past teen angst Back in 2012, aged just 16, Bajan-American rapper Malik Hall, AKA Haleek Maul, was making downtempo, introspective rap probing the sulky, nocturnal mu …
Tracks of the week reviewed: the Weeknd, Selena Gomez, the Strokes Summary: The Weeknd After Hours I don’t usually like to encourage artists who release six-minute songs, but let’s make an exception for the Weeknd who has, onc …
An Evening With Whitney review – Houston hologram is ghoulish cash-in ‘Welcome to Whitney Houston, very much alive,” says the star of the show, except she isn’t Houston. The American singer died aged 48 in 2012, yet has …
It's about time film began representing the lesbian gaze The portrayal of lesbians in mainstream cinema tends to involve prosthetic vaginas and gratuitous sex scenes; so Céline Sciamma’s Portrait of a Lady o …
Michael Medwin obituary Summary: Best known for countless character roles in films and as the wide-boy Corporal Springer in the highly acclaimed 1950s TV series The Army Game, the act …
Denis & Katya review – Venables turns real-life tragedy into chilling opera Romeo and Juliet crossed with Bonnie and Clyde: Denis Muravyov and Katya Vlasova were both innocent and transgressive. Music Theatre Wales’s UK premie …
'It's terrifying': why young pop stars are suddenly playing arenas Picking up an honour earlier this month at LA’s Pollstar awards, which celebrate achievements in live music, Elton John delivered some advice. “To peo …
The problem with Wendy: how did an Oscar-nominated director get it so wrong? It’s a tale as old as time, or at least as old as Hollywood: a hotshot young director scores on their first outing and, awash with accolades and flatt …
Giving millionaires the boot: why Cahiers du Cinéma editors quit en masse Summary: The mass resignation of the staff of Cahiers du Cinéma, the film journal that launched the French New Wave, has reignited debate in France about the p …
'I bet Bon Scott is pissing himself': the AC/DC covers gig shutting down a major Perth highway Summary: It may be a celebration of a uniquely Western Australian cult figure, but Highway To Hell – the Perth festival’s closing gambit for 2020, which will s …
Roman Polanski wins best director at French 'Oscars' amid protests Police and protesters clashed briefly outside the French “Oscars” ceremony on Friday evening as the Franco-Polish film director Roman Polanski was awa …
Streaming: the best film at Cannes 2019 not to win a prize? The further it recedes in the rearview mirror, the more last year’s Cannes competition looks like an exceptionally good vintage. This week, British ci …
George MacKay: ‘Playing Ned Kelly was exhausting – I felt very vulnerable’ “There’ll be no more of this shit,” snarls George MacKay, eyes bulging like a young Iggy Pop. “I’ll give you the full 11 inches of my dick, just so yo …
The week in classical: Madam Butterfly; The Angel Esmeralda – review Summary: Iridescent blue, bilious green, orange, violet, black, blood-red. In English National Opera’s spectacular staging of Puccini’s Madam Butterfly (1904), …
One to watch: Sofia Kourtesis Summary: Listen to the opening number of the Peruvian-born producer Sofia Kourtesis’s first, self-titled EP, and you imagine a train made of rackety sonic junk …
Sleater-Kinney review: an all-change powerhouse of a gig Some bands are just bands. Most of the good ones, however, represent something beyond a unit that plays some tunes. They become an anchor point for a …
Berlin film festival 2020 roundup: sturm und drang and pigs and cows This year could have been simply wunderbar for the Berlin film festival, but it didn’t quite work that way. The festival organisers, including new art …
The Invisible Man review – Wells with a Hitchcockian twist Summary: This update of HG Wells’s classic sci-fi tale smartly aligns itself with the spied-upon rather than the story’s monstrous invisible eye, flipping the …
The gospel according to … the classical orchestra that’s just been converted Summary: Britain’s most acclaimed classical orchestra is to take its first step into the world of gospel music on Sunday in a ground-breaking, sold-out choral …
Polanski’s ‘Oscar’ divides elite world of French cinema The elite world of French cinema, one of the pillars of the country’s exception culturelle, was bitterly divided after Roman Polanski was named best d …
Grimes: Miss Anthropocene review –  a deep, dark trip “I’ll never be your dream girl,” sang Grimes on the last line of her aggressively poppy 2015 album Art Angels. On her fifth record, the Canadian produ …
Dark Waters review – Todd Haynes’s thriller fizzes with righteous fury Based on a 2016 New York Times Magazine article, this sobering and sophisticated political thriller about a corporate defence attorney doesn’t appear …
Downhill review – unsteady avalanche comedy inspired by Force Majeure Snow rushes down a mountain at top speed; Pete (Will Ferrell) bolts, grabbing his phone and leaving his wife Billie (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) and their tw …
Cornershop's Tjinder Singh: 'My dad said, 'They’ll not always want you here'. That stuck' Tjinder Singh, the frontman of Cornershop, hasn’t been home for nearly a decade. To get to Wednesfield in the West Midlands, you drive east out of Wol …
Broken Law review – headbutt of a thriller about brothers on either side of the law Here is a lairy Dublin crime melodrama that launches a headbutt at you right out of the screen. Sometimes the punches land and sometimes they don’t. T …
Elvis Costello review – electric atmosphere in barnstorming show Elvis Costello cemented his reputation with his first five albums that channelled the energy of the punk era into classic songwriting. Since then, he …
Stereophonics review – back-to-basics rock and singalongs heard for miles There’s an eerie agelessness to Stereophonics. Two decades on from what might be considered their heyday, they are touring yet another No 1 album – Ki …
Akademie für Alte Musik Berlin/Faust review – clarity and dazzling performances It’s hard to think of any other leading violinist today who moves as comfortably as Isabelle Faust does between the 19th and 20th-century repertoire a …
Real Estate: The Main Thing review – artfully polished tedium Three albums of catchily jangling indie into their career, New Jersey’s Real Estate parted ways with founding member and lead guitarist Matt Mondanile …
Public Enemy fire Flavor Flav after clash over Bernie Sanders rally Public Enemy have fired founder member Flavor Flav following a dispute over the group performing at a Bernie Sanders rally, bringing to an end one of …
Poland's world-beating new film-makers: 'We have a common enemy' Summary: It is a cold, misty afternoon in Warsaw and I am having tea with the Oscar-winning film-maker Paweł Pawlikowski in the elegant cafe belonging to the H …
Michael Kiwanuka review – soul's troubled man speaks truth to power After two Brit award nominations and the critical rapture that greeted Michael Kiwanuka’s third album – Kiwanuka, which reached No 2 in November – thi …
Fidelio review – Davidsen approaches greatness in uneven production Tobias Kratzer’s new production of Fidelio turns Beethoven’s only opera into a parable about the nature of political engagement and our frequent compl …
50 great tracks for March by Christine and the Queens, Yves Tumor, Fizzler and more Christine and the Queens – I Disappear in Your Arms What is better than a great song? A great song in two languages, each offering a different perspec …
Changing the record: why High Fidelity's gender swap is perfectly timed It was perhaps always a given that High Fidelity, the much-loved-Nick Hornby-novel-turned-Hollywood-romcom, would be turned into a television series – …
Tones and I review – Dance Monkey star reaches biggest stage yet Dance Monkey, the song that changed Toni Watson’s life, was the byproduct of an unhappy episode while she was busking in Byron Bay, New South Wales. H …
'The road will kill you': why older musicians are cancelling tours In a chilling quote from much-loved music documentary The Last Waltz, about The Band’s final concert in 1976, leader Robbie Robertson looks straight i …
Gwyneth Paltrow said starring in Shallow Hal was a 'disaster' – here’s why she is right ‘Disaster” is how Gwyneth Paltrow has summed up her role in the 2001 film Shallow Hal, which will surprise few people who have actually seen it. Jack …
James Lipton, host of Inside the Actors Studio, dies aged 93 James Lipton, who was best known for hosting the TV series Inside the Actors Studio, has died at 93. Lipton’s wife, Kedakai Turner, confirmed to TMZ t …
Deborah Dugan: suspended Grammys chief fired after misconduct investigation Deborah Dugan, who had been suspended from her position as president and chief executive of the Recording Academy, has now seen her contract officiall …
Down the Cosmic Hole: are Berlin's 56-hour party people facing their last dance? It is 1am on a Saturday and the crowd outside Berlin LGBTQ+ club night Cocktail d’Amore stretches from the door of its venue, Griessmuehle, along the …
Rolling back: why we should welcome Mick Jagger's  big screen return In the chilly new neo-noir The Burnt Orange Heresy, Mick Jagger plays Joseph Cassidy, a conniving art dealer who manipulates a desperate art critic in …
The month's best mixes: romantic grime, reverberant birdsong and more Elijah & Skilliam: Valentines Rhythm & grime is the genre that never quite was. The term was coined in the early to mid 00s when grime producers DVA, …
Lewis Capaldi review – the tears of pop's characterful clown As Lewis Capaldi is fond of observing, he’s the last person you’d expect to become the biggest new pop star in the country. With his satin tour jacket …
'Boring but cool!': can children predict box-office success? I knew that Sonic the Hedgehog would be a hit film long before it came out, because I have a secret weapon: a five-year-old. My son latched on to the …
'A generation that decided to fight': making music amid chaos in Venezuela ‘Everything here happens at gunpoint,” someone tells me when I arrive in Caracas. Venezuela is in crisis, suffering from a lack of power, water and ba …
James Franco accusers are 'jumping on the #MeToo bandwagon', say actor's lawyers James Franco has responded to allegations of sexual harassment by two former students by claiming they were an attempt to “jump on the [#MeToo] bandwa …
Postpone the new James Bond film, say 007 fans wary of coronavirus Summary: James Bond fans have called for the global release of No Time to Die to be delayed because of the coronavirus outbreak. The global premiere of the fil …
Prog rock stars Genesis announce reunion The British prog rock band Genesis have announced that they will reunite for a series of UK stadium shows in November and December. “There’s a Genesis …
'It's hopeful and generous': Thurston Moore's experimental record shop Thurston Moore is sitting in his shop window, pricing up a pile of records and telling me how Sun Ra used to operate. “Before he was going on tour, to …
Immortal Hero review – silly vanity project made in bad faith Here’s a biopic about a world-changing faith leader, a man who has published 2,500 books – according to his website – including accounts of his seance …
The Way Back review – Ben Affleck battles booze in half-baked drama There’s an irresistible external narrative attached to Warrior director Gavin O’Connor’s new alcoholism drama The Way Back: the addict at its centre i …
Escape from Pretoria review – Daniel Radcliffe restages ANC prison break The rather amazing true story of the white ANC activist Tim Jenkin and his audacious escape from Pretoria Prison in apartheid-era South Africa is told …
Zenek review – synth-pop and showbiz behind the iron curtain Polish director Jan Hryniak has made a shaky drama about a teenager from 1980s nowheresville who becomes a mega-successful pop star. Based on the real …
Bond movie No Time to Die pushed back to November The next James Bond film No Time to Die has been pushed back to November. The 25th 007 outing, set to be Daniel Craig’s last, was scheduled for a glob …
Military Wives review – feelgood choir comedy strains in vain for laughs A military wives choir film without Gareth Malone? Isn’t that like The Witches of Eastwick without Jack Nicholson? Here is a fantasy-realist dramedy v …
Sulphur and White review – a bold study of abuse and trauma Sulphur and White is a painful, disturbing and absorbing episodic drama based on the life of NSPCC campaigner and abuse survivor David Tait – played h …
The unstoppable rise of nosebleeds in cinema Summary: That stress can induce nosebleeds is partly cinematic myth. Going by the frequency with which they appear in film, you would imagine most of us are co …
Alanis Morissette review – Jagged Little Pill still cuts deep after 25 years In the 25 years since Jagged Little Pill made Alanis Morissette a household name, the album has been around the block a few times. There was an acoust …
Evil or genius – what has Disney done to Artemis Fowl? As chequered histories go, the story of Artemis Fowl’s marathon trek to the big screen is not quite up there with that of Terry Gilliam’s famously lon …
Strangulation, asphyxiation, rubber: making the BDSM romcom Dogs Don't Wear Pants Summary: BDSM is – perhaps surprisingly – big news in Palm Springs, southern California. The director Jukka-Pekka Valkeapää, showing his new, fetish-themed, th …
Parasite: Black & White Version review – horror with a shade of Ealing comedy There’s a moment in Terry Zwigoff’s 1994 documentary about Robert Crumb when the cartoonist leans over his teenage son, tweaks the colour on TV so the …
Oasis's greatest songs – ranked! 30. Lord Don’t Slow Me Down (2007) A stand-alone single that was reportedly removed from Don’t Believe the Truth to cut down on the number of Noel Gal …
Paul McGann: 'Being called a perfumed ponce? It's an ice-breaker' ‘There’s you, and there’s Frodo, and the Fonz. Then there’s Stan Lee, God rest his soul, and Hulk Hogan. Then there’s the Power Rangers in the corner. …
Beethoven: Piano Sonatas – Staier's period instrument performances are thoughtful and insightful Summary: Ein Neuer Weg (A New Way) is the title of Andreas Staier’s album, which brings together the piano works that Beethoven composed at the very beginning …
Calm With Horses review – crime and brutal punishment in rural Ireland The musician and actor Cosmo Jarvis looks eerily like a young Marlon Brando in this brutal gothic-realist drama set in the west of Ireland, directed b …
'TikTok we need to talk': Lizzo slams social media app for body shaming Lizzo has accused the social media app TikTok of body shaming after it deleted multiple videos of her in a bathing suit. “TikTok keeps taking down my …
Number of female UK songwriters jumps by 60% The number of female songwriters signing with UK rights organisation PRS for Music has increased by 60%, but they remain hugely outnumbered by their m …
Australian music prize: Sampa the Great becomes first artist to win prestigious award twice Australian hip-hop artist Sampa the Great has made history by becoming the first person to win the Australian music prize twice. Her 2019 album The Re …
Paul Kelly, Methyl Ethel, Odette and more: Australia's best new music for March Summary: L-Fresh the Lion ft Moza and Mirrah – Mother For fans of: The Love Below, De La Soul, Jurassic Five Elton John’s favourite Aussie hip-hop artist, L-Fr …
Onward review – Pixar conjures big-screen adventure with wizard quest story Perhaps impatient, as we all are, for the next renaissance or breakthrough for the Pixar/Disney animation studio, commentators are a bit overexcited a …
Blame it on Bernie: did Public Enemy really split over politics? The Democratic party primary season is a rancorous, high-stakes affair that divides families and ruptures friendships. This year’s campaign has the un …
'Conga line around the car park!' A week in the life of a British venue Regulars at the Brudenell Social Club in Leeds have all sorts of favourite memories of the venue. For some, it is the night Thee Oh Sees played in the …
Greg Kinnear on Misbehaviour and #MeToo: ‘Where were human resources in the 1990s?’ Can I ask you something?” says Greg Kinnear, slightly nervously, toward the end of our conversation. “Did you notice that I’m wearing a prosthetic nos …
Jhené Aiko: Chilombo review – sexual, spiritual and wildly over-long Prior to recording her third album, Jhené Aiko got immersed in the practice of sound healing. She incorporated the vibrational hum of crystal alchemy …
Paul Heaton & Jacqui Abbott: Manchester Calling review – rich vignettes on life's vagaries Paul Heaton recently remarked that if he’d known how well his songs would resonate with ordinary people up and down the country, he’d have written mor …
Lauv: How I’m Feeling review – voguish pop alienation and anxiety ‘Life ain’t easy these days,” sighs Lauv - AKA 25-year-old Ari Leff - on Changes, a track that covers the musician’s decision to medicate his mental h …
Disq: Collector review – bedroom rockers mope towards majesty Faced with bleak job prospects, corrupted politics and a planet in existential crisis, it’s no wonder young indie rockers are currently given to both …
Two-headed monster: the new trend for splitting albums in half Bad news: just when you thought that 2020 could not bring any more fresh misery, and as if streaming hasn’t made the traditional album release complic …
Spenser Confidential review – Mark Wahlberg crash lands on Netflix Summary: Mark Wahlberg’s first film for Netflix, a charmless little shrug of a caper called Spenser Confidential, is the kind of film that evaporates as it’s b …
McCoy Tyner, revered jazz pianist, dies aged 81 Jazz pianist McCoy Tyner has died at the age of 81. The death of Tyner, known as one of the most influential figures in jazz, was announced on his Fac …
The week in classical: Fidelio; London Philharmonic Orchestra/ Vänskä – review “Liberté, égalité, fraternité”. These are three foreign words a British audience is guaranteed to understand. This imperative of the French Revolution …
Big Thief review – subtle rockers make a grand noise Adrianne Lenker arrives on stage with her three bandmates to no fanfare except clamorous applause from the crowd. She’s the musical core of Big Thief, …
One to watch: Che Lingo In October last year, Che Lingo told the taste-making site Hypebeast that he had no plans to sign to a label. But when Hollywood actor Idris Elba come …
Onward review – more emotional wizardry from Pixar The latest Pixar animation, Onward is heartfelt, slickly executed and potently effective as both a rousing adventure and a tear-jerker. But compared t …
Carla Bley Trio: Life Goes On review – warm, spirited and even funny This set begins with the piano laying down the bass line for a simple blues. Before the last note of each phrase there is a tiny hesitation, just long …
Home listening: Poulenc, Parry and a magnificent seven • In these grim times, with an epidemic lurking and floods rising, we could all do with something cheery to distract us. Thank goodness, then, for a n …
Georgia Ruth: Mai review – lush Welsh pastorals and other odes to spring The surge of inventive modern folk from Cymru continues. Modern is a relative term, of course. Owen Shiers’s recent debut as Cynefin, Dilyn Afon, a be …
Escape from Pretoria review – ingenious apartheid-era thriller Summary: The real-life jailbreak of apartheid-era political prisoners Tim Jenkin (Daniel Radcliffe) and Stephen Lee (Daniel Webber) is the inspiration for this …
Military Wives review – on song with chalk-and-cheese Kristin Scott Thomas and Sharon Horgan “Great music doesn’t happen when things are perfect,” says Sharon Horgan’s brassy Lisa in this formulaic yet ultimately winning British dramedy. “It h …
Stephen King attacks axing of Woody Allen book Author Stephen King has hit out at publisher Hachette over its decision to drop publication of Woody Allen’s memoir after a protest from his son, the …
US Girls: Heavy Light review – a major talent doubles down Summary: The many albums of US Girls – Meghan Remy – could be summed up as a series of sound art installations evolving from experimentation into bold tunefuln …
Rocks stars: meet the teenage cast of the hot new British film Seven teenage girls are falling over themselves with laughter. They’re meant to be posing for a picture, but it’s a bit like photographing a box of pu …
St John Passion review – immersive and communal  Bach staging is deeply touching James Conway presents Bach’s St John Passion as a communal reflection on faith, loss and mortality in his production for English Touring Opera, descri …
Stephen Malkmus: Traditional Techniques review – an enjoyable take on early-70s psych-folk Summary: Almost two decades into a solo career that appeared to have long ago lost its momentum amid a welter of endless, aimless jams, Stephen Malkmus has red …
Susanna review – young artists shine in cluttered Handel staging Welcome back to Covent Garden, Susanna. It has been 271 years since Handel’s oratorio last had an outing at the Royal Opera House, where it was premie …
Robert Glasper review – genre-blending jazz keeps chaos at bay On any given performance, a crowd can encounter several unpredictable versions of the pianist Robert Glasper. There is the studious interpreter, head …
Missy Mazzoli/Kelly Moran review – captivating musical alchemy Summary: The American composer Missy Mazzoli has said that her ideal listener would know nothing about her or her music before hearing it, removing any preconc …
Laurie Morgan obituary Summary: Laurie Morgan, who has died aged 93, was an influential member of the coterie of British jazz experimenters of the 1940s and 50s that most famously in …
New movie Misbehaviour highlights 70s sexism, but how far have we come since that era? Summary: As well as commemorating the feminist disruption of Miss World 1970, the new movie Misbehaviour does a great job of highlighting the sexism of that er …
'It's a case of holding your nerve': festivals face coronavirus insurance disaster The postponement of Ultra music festival in Miami and the cancellation of SXSW in Austin came in swift succession last week – the first two major musi …
Laszlo Heltay obituary My friend Laszlo Heltay, who has died aged 89, was a conductor and choral director who was instrumental in setting up the Academy of St Martin’s choir …
Max von Sydow, star of The Exorcist and The Seventh Seal, dies aged 90 Max von Sydow, the Swedish actor who made his name in a series of landmark films with Ingmar Bergman before progressing to international stardom, has …
Ash: how we made Girl from Mars Tim Wheeler, singer, guitarist, songwriter Mark Hamilton and I both got guitars for Christmas when we were 12. We formed a terrible heavy metal band c …
Parasite overtakes The Passion of the Christ as biggest ever foreign language film in the UK Oscar-winning horror-thriller Parasite has become the highest-earning foreign language film at the UK box office, overtaking the 2004 Mel Gibson-direc …
Max von Sydow obituary The great Swedish film and stage actor Max von Sydow, who has died aged 90, will be remembered by different people for different roles: the title role …
McCoy Tyner obituary Playing a supporting role to a force of nature is a tough call in any form of music – and in the maelstroms of jazz improvisation tougher still. The p …
Max von Sydow: an aristocrat of cinema who made me weep The opening of the seventh seal in the Book of Revelation, disclosing the truth of God’s existence and the second coming, will result in a mysterious …
Why Woody Allen’s publisher was wrong to drop his memoir Was Hachette right to cancel Woody Allen’s memoir? Patrick, London What a strange, through-the-looking-glass world we live in, when people who conside …
Led Zeppelin: Stairway to Heaven not partly stolen, court affirms A US appeals court has reinstated a ruling that British rockers Led Zeppelin did not steal part of their song Stairway to Heaven from another band. Th …
'It was just left to the people': behind a chilling documentary on the Flint water crisis This is, BuzzFeed News noted recently, a time when “only the last 72 hours seem to matter in politics”. It is the age of news as instant gratification …
Misbehaviour review – likable comedy of bizarre and farcical 1970 Miss World There’s a very British sort of wackiness to this bizarre and farcical true story from the annals of pop culture, told here with charm and fun. It’s th …
‘History needs to be set alight’: Shabaka Hutchings on the radical power of jazz Shabaka Hutchings has been thinking about the end a lot. “For there to be a change, there needs to be the end of what we want changed,” he says, oracl …
Così fan tutte review – has wit and hilarity of 1930s screwball comedy Laura Attridge’s new English Touring Opera production of Così fan tutte relocates Mozart’s great comedy of sexual manipulation from 18th-century Naple …
Big man, small kid: why the bodybuilding babysitter is a recipe for movie success There are a number of things you should check before you hire a new babysitter. Are they experienced? Can they show up on time? Are they up-to-date wi …
Baxter Dury webchat – your questions answered on his father, his love of suits and Lou Reed Summary: Alex_Caroll writes: You once said that your family name actually comes from the town Dury by Amiens in France. Do you know when (and why) your family …
Tom Watkins, pop manager behind Pet Shop Boys, Bros and East 17, dies aged 70 Tom Watkins, the music manager who launched the careers of some of the UK’s biggest pop acts, has died aged 70. Friends confirmed that he died on 24 F …
Body of work: why Billie Eilish is right to stand her ground against shaming Billie Eilish has given the music industry everything it could possibly want. An authentic new voice that appeals to teenagers and their parents. A de …
Alt-pop star US Girls: 'Things happened to me as a kid that broke part of my brain' What is the most hurtful thing anyone’s ever said to you? “I don’t know what’s wrong with me that I make children like this.” “I don’t want you.” “Tha …
Bacurau review – ultraviolent freakout in Brazil's outback Summary: Brazilian auteur Kleber Mendonça Filho, here co-directing with his producer and production designer Juliano Dornelles, has relinquished the quieter, m …
Bach Collegium Japan/Suzuki review – tightly plotted drama with real bite Thirty years after he founded his groundbreaking Bach Collegium Japan, Masaaki Suzuki seems to have aged barely a day, yet his performances with them …
‘I never got to thank him’: fans mourn a generation of rappers dying young Summary: To listen to rap music in 2020 is to be in a constant state of mourning. Mac Miller, Lil Peep and Juice WRLD have died of drug overdoses; XXXTentacion …
The Hunt review – gory Trump-baiting satire is more hype than horror How do you solve a problem like reviewing The Hunt? The schlocky horror film would ordinarily garner little attention beyond genre fans and a handful …
Bob Marley’s former partner faces loss of flat where he lived in 1970s Summary: A film-maker and actor who dated Bob Marley claims she is being threatened with the imminent repossession of the London flat where the reggae musician …
Cannes film festival will only cancel if coronavirus outbreak worsens The president of the Cannes film festival has said that the 2020 edition will be cancelled if the coronavirus outbreak worsens but at present he is “r …
Cunningham review – powerful 3D documentary about a dance pioneer The 3D format, all the rage for about five minutes after Avatar, makes a comeback. Not deployed for a Hollywood blockbuster, but to capture dance in a …
Where have all the black cowboys gone? In Hell on the Border, a B-movie western set in Arkansas, Bass Reeves saves the life of a judge, tracks down a dangerous outlaw, and is appointed depu …
Max von Sydow could transform the trashiest pulp fantasy flick into a cultural touchstone When remembering the great Max von Sydow, it’s hard not to recall those iconic images of the medieval knight peering over the chess board into the sin …
Bloodshot review – Vin Diesel brings brawn in brainless action schlock It is the Hollywood screenwriter’s great misconception that self-consciously acknowledging cliche in a script neutralizes it. When one character does …
What’s the secret of happiness? Accepting that life is messy and difficult In an interview marking a decade since her debut album, Ellie Goulding has described her younger self as a mixture of curiosity and confusion: “What’s …
Musical notes: how male pop stars are making love songs all about them Boys in love Laura Snapes, deputy music editor Pop’s leading men once kept their love lives secret to preserve the illusion of availability. But today …
'It's a fun movie, I promise': behind the elites v 'deplorables' thriller The Hunt Summary: “I certainly didn’t make the movie to try and gin up controversy,” said Craig Zobel, director of the most controversial movie of not only this year bu …
And Then We Danced review – freewheeling story of secret love To be young and in love – these are the impossibly painful conditions driving a terrific feature by the Georgian-Swedish film-maker Levan Akin that wa …
Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson's travels: selfies, shows and beachside strolls before coronavirus diagnosis They are one of the highest profile Hollywood couples who attract wellwishers and autograph hunters in droves. So when it was discovered that Tom Hank …
My Spy review – Dave Bautista takes the muscle-man's tweenie test Here is a genially mediocre throwback to what has always been a rite of passage for US cinema’s frontline action men: the musclebound star demonstrati …
Paramore's Hayley Williams: 'A lot of my depression was misplaced anger' When Hayley Williams was nine, her dad often took her go-karting at Ultimate Fun World in Mississippi. The harder she pressed the accelerator, the mor …
'You ruined my premiere!': Beckinsale recalls Weinstein's obscenity-filled rant Kate Beckinsale has described an obscenity-filled rant by Harvey Weinstein in which he allegedly called her “stupid fucking cunt” after he objected to …
Posadas: Poética del Laberinto review – musical myriads lit up by mythology A 55-minute cycle of pieces for saxophone quartet might not seem a particularly enticing prospect. But in a succession of works over the last 20 years …
A Quiet Place and Fast & Furious sequels postponed due to coronavirus pandemic Summary: The horror sequel A Quiet Place Part II and action thriller follow-up Fast & Furious 9 are being postponed over fears linked to the coronavirus pandem …
Coronavirus: when binge-watching goes viral Was the coronavirus engineered by Netflix? This was one of the wilder conspiracy theories doing the rounds earlier this month, as observers noted how …
Glastonbury defies coronavirus threat to announce lineup with Kendrick Lamar Glastonbury is pressing ahead with preparations for its 50th anniversary year despite coronavirus fears, announcing a wave of more than 90 artists inc …
Top concert promoters and agencies urge suspension of large music events A group of five major concert promoters and music agencies have joined together to recommend a worldwide postponement of large live music events in Ma …
My Chemical Romance drops Australasian tour and Download festival cancelled amid coronavirus fears My Chemical Romance’s tour of Australia, New Zealand and Japan has become the latest casualty of the coronavirus, resulting in the cancellation of the …
Emily Blunt: 'It's about human beings and how they're affected by a crisis' Emily Blunt and her husband, John Krasinski, devised a rigorous self-care regime when the pair were making A Quiet Place, 2017’s harrowing self-isolat …
Dumama + Kechou: Buffering Juju review – a bewitching musical odyssey Summary: South Africa’s Mushroom Hour Half Hour label has been releasing some of the more ear-tickling sounds from the country’s experimental scene in recent y …
The Boomtown Rats: Citizens of Boomtown review – nostalgia and toe-curling currentness The first Boomtown Rats album for 36 years comes trailed by promotional bumf that really does it no favours at all. Pondering the state of the world, …
Code Orange: Underneath review – a thrilling new form of molten metal Despite its reputation as the satanic scourge of curtain-twitching suburbia, metal can be prone to the kind of squabbling you might see at a parish co …
It's my life: the rise of the pop-star scripted documentary “I would like to be excluded from this narrative, one that I have never been asked to be a part of, since 2009,” wrote Taylor Swift of her public feud …
Maria McKee: La Vita Nuova review – Show Me Heaven singer's high-drama alt-rock After emerging as a member of cowpunk band Lone Justice in the early 80s, Maria McKee really made her name in the 90s with the kind of impassioned alt …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Róisín Murphy, Dixie Chicks, Jarv Is... Róisín Murphy Murphy’s Law If you are undecided as to whether Róisín is single-handedly reviving disco (she is), then this, clocking in at a portly se …
Tom Hanks on coronavirus isolation: 'We are taking it one day at a time' Summary: Tom Hanks, the actor who has tested positive for Covid-19 while shooting in Australia, has updated fans on the condition of himself and his wife, Rita …
Disney delays release of Mulan, The New Mutants and Antlers as Black Widow speculation grows Mulan, Disney’s most expensive live-action remake to date, has been officially pulled from release schedules. Due to open in the US and UK on 27 March …
Stranger Things to Uncut Gems: a golden age of electronic soundtracks Summary: It is not hard to see why first-time feature director Nick Rowland looked to Benjamin John Powers for the soundtrack to his film Calm With Horses. It …
The Rise of the Synths review – the world's most nostalgic music scene If you have ever strutted around in sunglasses and a silken bomber jacket, and didn’t even have to try to keep a straight face, chances are you’re int …
Boris Johnson's hero is the mayor who kept the beaches open in Jaws. That's fine by me The coronavirus has turned the UK into an outlier. The rest of the world has seemingly gone into lockdown, shutting schools and public transport in a …
Record Store Day postponed until June over coronavirus Record Store Day has been postponed until 20 June due to the coronavirus. The event, set up in 2008 to champion independent record stores, involves th …
'Hammer blow': UK live music sector faces coronavirus disaster The UK live music industry is facing huge losses after tens of events have already been forced to cancel or postpone due to coronavirus. With the Who …
Big Time Adolescence review – Pete Davidson plays to type in low-key comedy After it premiered to mostly strong notices at Sundance in 2019, Big Time Adolescence seemed like an easy sell in theory, one of the easiest of that y …
Katie Melua: 'My musical ear developed during Georgia's blackouts' In a recording booth at the Georgian Film Studios in Tbilisi, an engineer helping to record the violinist Lisa Batiashvili’s new album curses under hi …
The week in classical: Giulio Cesare; Susanna – review Two very different approaches to Handel found their way on to London stages last week; one sure-footed and graceful, the other awkward and graceless, …
One to watch: Brooke Bentham The River Tyne has seen many singer-songwriters bubbling up from its banks. After Sting and Neil Tennant, Richard Dawson and Sam Fender comes 24-year- …
Misbehaviour review – well-mannered Miss World drama “So you don’t want to bring down the establishment, you just want a seat at the table?” sneers anarchist women’s libber Jo (Jessie Buckley). Though in …
Throbbing Gristle and Psychic TV leader Genesis Breyer P-Orridge dies aged 70 Genesis Breyer P-Orridge, co-founder of avant-garde band Throbbing Gristle and leader of Psychic TV, has died aged 70, according to reports from their …
Home listening: a wealth of new music, plus Alma Mahler in person… Summary: • Mixing different musical styles used to be called crossover. No one much liked the word. The Civitas Ensemble – three top players from the Chicago S …
Bacurau review – wildly entertaining Brazilian weirdness Disaster communism is given the weird western treatment in Kleber Mendonça Filho (Neighbouring Sounds, Aquarius) and Juliano Dornelles’s wildly entert …
Mark Kermode’s Secrets of Cinema – from Oscar-winning strategies to 007’s debt to Hitchcock Despite the title, there’s no “secret” to Secrets of Cinema, a new three-part BBC4 series of which begins this week. Instead the programme is about th …
The Hunt review – silly horror satire Following mass shootings in Dayton, Ohio and El Paso, Texas in 2019, Universal decided to delay the release of this satirical horror film, should it i …
Niall Horan: Heartbreak Weather review – 1D’s quiet one comes good Summary: When One Direction were fused together on The X Factor in 2010, Niall Horan – all happy-to-be-there charm and third-place grin – got lost in the mix. …
Genesis P-Orridge: troubling catalyst who loathed rock yet changed it for ever For someone who occasionally purported to hate rock music – it was, a homemade T-shirt s/he was fond of wearing in the 1970s proclaimed, “for arselick …
Genesis P-Orridge obituary “I am at war with the status quo of society and I am at war with those in control and power,” said Genesis P-Orridge in 1989. “I’m at war with hypocri …
The Marriage of Figaro review – superb singing in hilarious staging Summary: Sometimes simple solutions really do work best. Joe Hill-Gibbins’ new production of The Marriage of Figaro for English National Opera stages Mozart an …
CocoRosie: Put the Shine On review: a return to core idiosyncrasies It’s 17 years since Bianca and Sierra Casady materialised like a fever dream of New York’s 00s freak-folk scene, a new, weird American incarnation of …
Letter: Andy Gill obituary Andy Gill and Gang of Four weren’t just students in Leeds, they were part of the cultural infrastructure of the city. They were part of the musical sc …
Lord Puttnam warns of skills shortage in UK film The Oscar-winning producer David Puttnam has warned Britain will be eclipsed as a movie powerhouse unless there is an urgent push to tackle a skills s …
The Painted Bird: 'My film isn't depraved. It's truthful' It is not often a three-hour, black-and-white Czech film makes headlines in the British tabloids, but The Painted Bird earned that dubious honour last …
Mike Skinner: 'It's not cool to be 40 in a nightclub, getting off your face. But it happens' ‘This is where I go on like Morrissey and say something terrible,” says Mike Skinner. “That’s what ageing musicians are supposed to do, isn’t it? They …
Fangs out: is Blumhouse the new Hammer Horror? After the unexpected success of The Invisible Man, a low-budget adaptation of the HG Wells novel that tapped into contemporary fears around stalking a …
Cinema audiences drop dramatically as coronavirus restrictions bite Cinema attendance in the US and around the world slumped dramatically last weekend, as the effects of the coronavirus outbreak began to bite. In North …
Arnold Schwarzenegger and his tiny horses urge people to stay home Arnold Schwarzenegger has a stern message for Californians tempted to defy Governor Gavin Newsom and go out to bars, restaurants or wineries while the …
Jon Hopkins review – recital turns rave as fans embrace one last gig Sunday evening and the atmosphere in Brighton Dome feels curiously subdued. Perhaps it has something to do with the fact that you can’t escape current …
Erin Brockovich at 20: how a grim true story became a glossy star vehicle In 1989, Steven Soderbergh changed the independent film business forever with sex, lies and videotape. A decade later, he conquered Hollywood. But it’ …
Exposure therapy: why we're obsessed with watching virus movies In flagrant disregard for the old adage about the show going on, the entertainment industry has ground to a halt. Reports of coronavirus outbreaks put …
LSO/Pappano review - intense and unsparing emotional directness At the end of his concert with the London Symphony Orchestra, Antonio Pappano made a short speech, thanking the audience for attending and giving thei …
The Invisible Man, Emma and other movies to stream early as cinemas close Summary: As Covid-19 continues to gut the entertainment industry, shutting down theaters across the world to prevent community transmission of the virus, Unive …
Sorry, the band making ennui sexy Most bands form over pints, broken hearts and aspirations of superstardom. Few start with mild bullying. But Asha Lorenz, the frontwoman of London ban …
The last dance: clubbing in the coronavirus crisis Bang Face, a dance music festival held at Southport holiday park Pontins, is known for a particularly hell-for-leather approach to jackhammering dance …
Drake scores most US chart hits ever Summary: Canadian rapper Drake now has more US chart hits than any other artist in history, scoring his 208th Billboard Hot 100 entry this week. The rapper bro …
Paul Schrader slams coronavirus film shutdown, says he'd rather 'die on the job' Film director Paul Schrader has castigated the producers of his current film after the shoot was shut down after one of the actors was diagnosed with …
Tom Hanks leaves hospital after coronavirus diagnosis in Australia Actor Tom Hanks and his wife, Rita Wilson, have been discharged from an Australian hospital but remain in self-isolation as they recover from coronavi …
From Aphex Twin to Al Green: the most soothing songs to self-isolate with Summary: Alexis Petridis, chief rock and pop critic Deniece Williams – Free From 1976, soul music so pillowy and cosseting, it makes Minnie Ripperton’s Loving …
Final Destination at 20: the bleakest teen horror film ever made? There’s a special, sparsely populated subgenre of films that have had a unique effect on my behaviour. They’ve lingered long after the end credits not …
Martino Sclavi obituary The Italian film producer and writer Martino Sclavi, who has died aged 47, will be best remembered for his 2017 memoir The Finch in My Brain. The book …
Fiona Apple: six reasons she is the perfect artist for a time of crisis It’s been eight years since Fiona Apple last graced the world with a studio album, but an illuminating profile in the latest issue of the New Yorker, …
Have dog actors had their last on-screen bark? Summary: An old man and a dog sit on the moss-covered roof of a log cabin in the Canadian wilderness. It is a warm summer’s night – a river gurgles nearby. The …
'Sing across rooftops': Bono writes coronavirus song dedicated to Italy U2 frontman Bono has performed his first new music since 2017 with a song inspired by Italians quarantined during the coronavirus outbreak. He posted …
Katy Perry wins appeal in $2.8m plagiarism case Summary: Katy Perry has won an appeal in a copyright case involving damages of $2.8m (£2.3m). In July 2014, Perry was accused of plagiarising the song Joyful N …
Fire Will Come review – pyromaniac's tale obscured by smoke Summary: It is certainly an ominous title for a movie about a convicted pyromaniac being released from prison and allowed home to live with his mother. Oliver …
Glastonbury: tell us how you feel about the festival's cancellation News that the Glastonbury festival 2020 has been cancelled to prevent the spread of coronavirus will have come as a shock to many. The festival’s 50th …
Glastonbury 2020: festival cancelled due to coronavirus outbreak The Glastonbury festival, which was due to celebrate its 50th anniversary year in 2020 with headliners including Taylor Swift, Paul McCartney and Kend …
Daryl Davis: the black musician who converts Ku Klux Klan members Daryl Davis is a musician – a pianist to be exact. He has jammed with the likes of Chuck Berry, Jerry Lee Lewis, BB King and even Bill Clinton. Loyal …
'Just keep laughing!': Judi Dench leads older stars lifting spirits on Twitter Now that Cats has faded from view, doomed to become an artefact held up by future historians as a decadent totem of how human beings spent their preci …
The Banker review – Apple's first movie is a slick yet patchy racism drama There’s a considerable amount of baggage arriving with the delayed release of The Banker, Apple’s first original movie, now landing online after a tok …
The Truth review – mothers, memory and an imperious Catherine Deneuve Summary: The title is a deadpan challenge, and it is up to us to decide where exactly this movie and its characters live in the disputed territory around truth …
'Instagram, how we feeling!' Can livestreaming replace cancelled gigs? “Instagram! How are we feeling tonight?” shouts rising Newcastle pop star L Devine. The crowd goes wild. She throws her arms wide. Then she pauses the …
Musicians ask Spotify to triple payments to cover lost concert revenue Musicians are calling on Spotify to triple its royalty rates following the coronavirus pandemic. Due to government guidance, many venues have closed a …
J Balvin: Colores review – with this much style, who needs substance? There are few hard and fast laws in the world of rock and pop music, but as a general rule of thumb, you can tell an album is considered a big deal if …
At least 170,000 lose jobs as film industry grinds to a halt due to coronavirus Summary: About 120,000 film industry workers have already lost their jobs in Hollywood as a result of the coronavirus shutdown, according to the US entertainme …
Coronavirus complicates things but Marvel's superheroes will fight on There’s a global crisis. An organism has infected hundreds of thousands, and entire nations are in lockdown. Is this the moment for Marvel’s Avengers …
David Bowie's 50 greatest songs – ranked! 50. Let Me Sleep Beside You (1967) A rejected single finally released on a 1970 cash-in compilation, Bowie’s first collaboration with the producer Ton …
Harry Potter and A Dog's Journey: Chinese cinemas detail plans to lure back audiences after coronavirus Plans to kickstart business at Chinese cinemas, when most of its 70,000 screens reopen at the end of March, have been announced. Variety reports that …
Cannes film festival postpones 2020 edition over coronavirus restrictions The Cannes film festival has postponed this year’s edition, it has announced. The festival made the news public on Thursday, saying that “several opti …
'Over one hour everything was cancelled' – how coronavirus devastated the film industry This time last week, it still seemed feasible the film industry might weather coronavirus. Only a handful of big-name blockbusters had been postponed …
'I'm trying to keep the panic down' – the coronavirus impact on music There isn’t a single part of the music industry that won’t be affected by the coronavirus outbreak. The most obvious are the high profile festival can …
Meredith Monk: Memory Game review – passing her musical baton to the next generation Meredith Monk might be one of America’s most fascinating composers, but the additional roles that she has created for herself – that of singer, dancer …
Duffy debuts first new music since rape ordeal revelation Duffy, the pop star who recently said she retreated from public life due to a kidnap and rape ordeal, has debuted her first new music since the announ …
The second coming of Jesus: how the Big Lebowski bowler was resurrected Long before the Marvel Cinematic Universe, with its characters popping up willy-nilly in one another’s adventures, there existed what might be called …
Morrissey: I Am Not a Dog on a Chain review – old man yells at cloud Summary: Morrissey’s official channels have recently been stressing the 60-year-old’s virility, citing reviews from his US tour that praise his “ageless” voice …
Låpsley: Through Water review – intensely poetic and powerful On her 2016 debut, Liverpudlian electronic pop singer Låpsley worked with a brains trust of songwriters and producers to try her hand at chart anthems …
Tom Hanks 'not great … but feeling better every day' after coronavirus diagnosis Tom Hanks and his wife, the actor and singer Rita Wilson, are “not great” but “feeling better every day”, according to his sister, Sandra. The couple …
Young T & Bugsey: Plead the 5th review – champagne-soaked retro rap London may no longer be the centre of UK hip-hop, but many regional rap scenes are only just minting their first mainstream stars. Thanks to two Top 2 …
Musicians head online as Covid-19 puts live shows on pause “It’s a way to bring money in,” says the Metronomy bassist, Olugbenga Adelekan, who is preparing to give an online lesson from his home studio. “It’s …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Bow Anderson, The Killers, Yaeji Bow Anderson Sweater Twenty-six years after Weezer’s Undone (The Sweater Song), the humble pullover is – finally! – back in the pop milieu. Here, newc …
Spike Lee, Cannes jury president, on postponement: 'Everybody has to pray' Spike Lee, the jury president for this year’s Cannes film festival, has welcomed artistic director Thierry Frémaux’s decision to postpone the festival …
US box office drops 97% year-on-year on Wednesday to reach historic low Summary: With only around 440 cinemas of 5,600 still open across the US, Wednesday’s midweek box office takings hit a historic low with $300,000 recorded. Most …
Breathe in, now breathe out: how musicians are embracing guided meditations Take a deep breath and come to a comfortable seated position: we could all do with some spiritual healing right now, but especially the music industry …
Outrage as Picturehouse makes cinema staff redundant 'with immediate effect' The Picturehouse cinema chain has been accused by its former employees of “irresponsible” treatment after staff were made redundant with immediate eff …
'You are a trophy': ex-beauty queens judge Misbehaviour ‘It was like a cattle market’ Sally-Ann Fawcett, author, former beauty contestant and judge From a historical point of view, the film Misbehaviour’s s …
Coronavirus leaves roadies and events crew devastated: 'It's the first industry to stop dead' During the 45 minutes we’re on the phone, Steve “Pineapple” Alberts – a behind-the-scenes mainstay of Australian live music – misses seven calls. Albe …
The Platform review – fiendish Netflix thriller about a gory battle for food There’s an ingenious idea at the dark heart of the Netflix-acquired Spanish thriller The Platform, slithering online just in time to make certain view …
Kenny Rogers, country music star, dies aged 81 Kenny Rogers, the American country music star with hits popular across the world, has died of natural causes at the age of 81 at his home in Sandy Spr …
Taking the Mickey: how Disney swallowed up all of culture Summary: So all-consuming and all-conquering has Disney become, it even owns the rights to its analogies now. First Disney was Marvel supervillain Thanos, rele …
Classical music: let the Berlin Phil come to you • As home entertainment becomes inevitably more central to our lives, the quest will surely be to capture the spirit of the authentic live experience. …
Home listening: in stormy times, Schubert is balm for the soul • “There’s no love song finer/ But how strange the change/ From major to minor”, as Cole Porter observed in his Great American Songbook classic Ev’ry …
Jessie Reyez: Before Love Came to Kill Us review – an outrageously fine debut As the pop landscape becomes progressively bolder and more crowded, it becomes more difficult for any new artist to make an impact. The bandwidth is s …
Fire Will Come review – emotional Spanish drama The Cannes jury prize-winning third feature from French-Galician film-maker Oliver Laxe (best known for Mimosas) may be his most accomplished yet. Aft …
Kenny Rogers: the genre gambler who always came up trumps Seven years ago, Kenny Rogers was interviewed by the Guardian. He was about to play Glastonbury, a turn of events by which he seemed utterly perplexed …
Kenny Barron, Dave Holland, Johnathan Blake: Without Deception review – an outstanding trio In jazz, there are pianists with bass and drums accompaniment and there are piano trios. They look the same on stage, but there is a world of differen …
The Truth review – Catherine Deneuve illuminates unsubtle family drama Hirokazu Kore-eda has long been a perceptive observer of fragile family dynamics. In the director’s first film set outside Japan, he trains his camera …
Dogs Don’t Wear Pants review – darkly humorous BDSM tale “I know how the heart works.” So says Juha, a middle-aged heart surgeon whose life falls apart in the wake of tragedy, but who finds unexpected escape …
Roger and Brian Eno: Mixing Colours review – an intimate conversation The Eno brothers have collaborated before, most recently on 2019’s revamp of the celebrated 1983 Apollo: Atmospheres & Soundtracks documentary score ( …
Mark Wahlberg: 'I was a little rough around the edges' The actor Mark Wahlberg is sitting beside me on a sofa in a Beverly Hills hotel, muscles bulging out of his T-shirt, immaculate white trainers resting …
Låpsley: Through Water review – bedroom auteur’s potent follow-up Following the release of her precocious debut album, 2016’s Long Way Home, bedroom auteur Holly Låpsley Fletcher took time away from music to take sto …
J Balvin: Colores review – a riot of hooks and ideas Since Colombian reggaeton sensation J Balvin’s global breakthrough with 2017 banger Mi Gente, his stock has risen thanks in part to a slew of well-cho …
Mali music star Rokia Traoré on hunger strike after  'kidnapping' arrest There are growing concerns for the health of Rokia Traoré, the internationally celebrated Malian singer, who has been on hunger strike at the Fleury-M …
Heaven can wait: what will happen to the films delayed by coronavirus? We are entering new territory for the movies: thanks to Covid-19, major titles have been pulled from release, in anticipation of plummeting audiences …
Kraftwerk: where to start in their back catalogue While many of us worldwide are unable to experience live music during the coronavirus crisis, or even socialise as normal, we can still use streaming …
Tom Hanks 'feeling better' after Covid-19 diagnosis Tom Hanks says he and Rita Wilson are feeling better, two weeks after being diagnosed with coronavirus while filming in Australia. Hanks, who had been …
As Australia closes all cinemas, China reopens 500 venues China’s cinemas are gradually opening once more for business across the country, although ticket sales remain slow. As the coronavirus outbreak begins …
Pretty Woman at 30: conservatism, materialism and glowing star power There are a lot of fantasies at play in Pretty Woman, the hit romantic comedy that transformed Julia Roberts into one of the biggest stars in Hollywoo …
Rick Astley: how we made Never Gonna Give You Up Rick Astley, singer I was the drummer in FBI, a jangly guitar band in Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire. After I started writing a few tunes, I became the …
Lyrical lockdown: rappers respond to coronavirus As cultural institutions and the arts sector struggle to adjust to their new roles during the coronavirus outbreak, one strand is proving particularly …
The Jesus Rolls review – John Turturro's Big Lebowski spin-off misses the mark Summary: John Turturro’s planned return to the universe of The Big Lebowski was announced four years ago with a fanfare as a much-anticipated spin-off from one …
Protests at UK cinemas' treatment of staff after coronavirus shutdown Former and current employees of the UK’s biggest cinema chains are protesting at treatment by their employers in the wake of the national cinema shutd …
Kim Kardashian West accuses Taylor Swift of lying over leaked tape One of celebrity’s longest-running but assumed dormant feuds has once again reared its head. Kim Kardashian West has accused Taylor Swift of lying aft …
Rihanna: where to start in her back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Rated R (2009) By 2009, the idea of the “rebel album” – a record by a (typically female) pop star that aims for darker, more m …
What I'm really watching: old Parky, ancient tennis and a tiger cowboy Last week, the BFI released a list of the films streaming on Netflix and Amazon Prime. It’s terrific. It contains several movies I’ve always wanted to …
Soothing songs for self-isolation: readers' picks Last week, we published a 60-song playlist of soothing songs to reduce the stresses of self-isolation and the coronavirus outbreak. We asked you for y …
My favourite film aged 12: Anne of the Thousand Days As a rather prim and unusual child, one of my favourite films when I was 12 or so was Anne of the Thousand Days, a long-forgotten and slightly dreary …
Strike a pose! My night at a vogue ball with Malcolm McLaren It was late September 1988: George Bush was up against Michael Dukakis in the first of their two TV debates. The presidential campaign was hotting up …
Julie Felix obituary In 1966, at the height of the folk music boom in Britain, David Frost’s satirical television show The Frost Report featured a young American folk sing …
From Fight Club to Brief Encounter: how self-isolation would change classic films In the age of self-isolation, I’ve started to change how I watch films. I’ve begun to clock moments when characters break the government rules on phys …
Henry Gray obituary Summary: In the electrifying blues scene of 1950s Chicago there were two men who rose above all others. On one side stood the stylish Muddy Waters; on the othe …
'It blew my mind': the incredible story of Netflix's feelgood Crip Camp Crip Camp, Netflix’s feelgood documentary executive-produced by the Obamas, begins out of the spotlight: at a hippy summer camp in the early 1970s cal …
Classical musicians plead for support as cancelled concerts blight income It’s not called the gig economy by accident. Musicians are among those hardest hit by the cultural shutdown, and with the government currently offerin …
Jackson Browne tests positive for coronavirus Summary: Jackson Browne has tested positive for coronavirus. The 71-year-old musician told Rolling Stone that he had mild symptoms including “a small cough and …
The Fall: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with Hex Enduction Hour (1982) ‘There’s always some cunt who wants to ask me about a masterpiece I made in 1982,” frothed Mark E Sm …
I've never seen … The Shining Summary: I can’t sit through a horror film. Or, I can sit, I just watch through clammy fingers, anticipating each jump scare while trying not to squeal and won …
Domains review – eerie echoes of a world in isolation The first movie of the coronaviral era is already here. Domains, from Japanese film-maker Natsuka Kusano, premiered last year at the Rotterdam film fe …
Adele, Keith Flint, Gil Scott-Heron and me: Richard Russell, the XL records Midas From the outside, Richard Russell’s studio looks like any other house in Notting Hill. But inside, there’s a plethora of vintage synthesisers and some …
From Panic Room to Cabin Fever: films about isolation, to watch in self-isolation Self-isolating alone Cast Away With Tom Hanks currently in Australia fighting Covid-19, let’s remember him in shaggier times: on an enforced Robinson …
The Chats: the making of Australia’s favourite ratbags The Chats might have the least aspirational origin story in music: they began out messing around together in a friend’s “bong shed” (where their chose …
The Perfect Candidate review – accidental heroine takes on the cynics Summary: With oil no longer at the premium it was, and Saudi Arabia’s government reportedly compelled to make concessions to western-style novelties such as fe …
Julie Felix: 10 of her greatest performances As a Californian teenager, Julie Felix – who has died aged 81 – never imagined herself becoming a folk singer, but her guitar became a handy tool for …
Kanye West likens backlash over support for Trump to racial profiling Kanye West has reaffirmed his support for Donald Trump, whom he has previously called “his brother”, in a new interview with the Wall Street Journal. …
Villain review – Richard Burton's masterclass in nastiness Summary: Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais are renowned for small-screen comic masterpieces such as Porridge and The Likely Lads, but in 1971 they scripted the d …
Phil Ochs: the doomed folk singer who woke up from the American dream As a kid in the 1950s, Phil Ochs cut class and spent afternoons at the local movie house. The Searchers and Rebel Without a Cause were two of his favo …
My favourite film aged 12: Peter Bradshaw on Juggernaut Do you cut the red wire or the blue wire? One renders the explosive mechanism harmless. The other causes everyone to die in an almighty explosion. And …
Haifaa Al-Mansour: 'Female leaders are crushed. Look at Hillary Clinton' Haifaa Al-Mansour’s latest film, The Perfect Candidate, opens with a doctor in her 20s driving to work. In any other film you wouldn’t register the fa …
Malian musician Rokia Traoré freed from French prison pending transfer to Belgium Malian musician Rokia Traoré has been released from a French prison, after being detained since 10 March for the alleged kidnap of her daughter in a c …
Could coronavirus-enforced streaming mean better blockbusters? There are few more problematic venues than the local multiplex if your aim is to avoid contracting Covid-19. That’s why cinemas were among the first b …
The 25 best Tom Hanks films – ranked! 25. Larry Crowne (2011) Yikes. This was one of the Hankster’s two directorial credits and it is a dull and lifeless autumn-years romcom, with Hanks pl …
Rapper Bugzy Malone involved in serious motorbike accident The Manchester rapper Bugzy Malone, AKA Aaron Davis, has been seriously injured after his motorbike hit a car on the streets of Bury. CCTV footage sho …
'In homage to cockroach limbs': Tom Hooper's Cats commentary deepens the mystery Tom Hooper, the Oscar-winning director of The King’s Speech, has revealed some of the logic behind the creative choices guiding his most recent film, …
Alice Coltrane: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Journey in Satchidananda (1971) The first thing to understand about composer and musician Alice Coltrane’s catalogue is that t …
Download and Isle of Wight festivals cancelled due to coronavirus Isle of Wight and Download festivals, two of the first major events in the UK’s summer music calendar, have cancelled their 2020 events due to Covid-1 …
La Passione review – Grisey's masterpiece endures Finding contemporary works to programme alongside Gérard Grisey’s Quatre Chants pour Franchir le Seuil (Four Songs for Crossing the Threshold) is an a …
Michael Gerard obituary My father, Michael Gerard, who has died aged 73, was a teacher with a great passion for music. He was proud to have founded the Greenshoots Ceilidh Or …
The Strokes on their wilderness years: 'There was conflict and fear and we got through it' Julian Casablancas and Albert Hammond Jr are sitting at opposite ends of an overstuffed sofa in an upmarket London hotel, some weeks before the corona …
Uncorked review – sub-par Netflix wine drama is far from vintage Summary: In Uncorked, an undemanding new Netflix drama, a young man finds himself trapped between his desire to be a sommelier and his father’s wish to have hi …
Bob Dylan releases first original song in eight years, 17-minute track about JFK Bob Dylan has released his first original music in eight years, a 17-minute long song about the JFK assassination. A ballad set to piano, strings and …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The World Is Yours Netflix was supposed to be the great democratizer. The streaming platform’s most ardent fans have argued in its favor as a level playing field, instan …
Dua Lipa: Future Nostalgia review – a true pop visionary Dua Lipa could have taken an easy path to sustaining her status as Britain’s most successful female pop star on album number two. A few Ed Sheeran co- …
The Chats: High Risk Behaviour review – dorkish fun from Aussie pub poets Summary: After some colourful YouTube videos that went viral and two acclaimed EPs, Dave Grohl/Iggy Pop-favoured Aussies the Chats’ “shed rock” debut blazes ou …
Abbey Road zebra crossing repainted in coronavirus lockdown The iconic Abbey Road zebra crossing made famous by the 1969 Beatles album of the same name has been repainted while the streets of London are empty b …
Skepta, Chip and Young Adz: Insomnia review – dark, funny and perfectly timed Summary: This surprise album from three leading UK MCs is a perfectly timed gift. Mercury prize-winning Skepta, Tottenham MC Chip – both longstanding grime vet …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Fenne Lily, Waxahatchee, Perfume Genius Fenne Lily Hypochondriac “I’m freaking out / Now I’m sick and waiting for a moment to stop and not feel so much,” sings Bristol’s Fenne Lily in this p …
Ridley Scott mocks Donald Trump over coronavirus response Ridley Scott, the director of Alien, Blade Runner, Gladiator and The Martian, has taken aim at Donald Trump and Boris Johnson over their leadership du …
James Bond gun collection stolen in London raid An “irreplaceable” collection of prop guns used in James Bond films has been stolen from a house in Enfield, north London. Five deactivated guns, incl …
Miraa May: 'Women in music are sexualised so much. I find it disrespectful' Miraa May’s pop preaches unshakeable self-love (“Tell ’em I don’t bow down to nobody,” goes one hook). But curled up on her sofa, bare-faced and dress …
Bob Dylan: Murder Most Foul review – a dark, dense ballad for the end times As with pretty much anything Bob Dylan does these days, you can only speculate at his reasons for unexpectedly releasing a 17-minute song, ostensibly …
Why playlists are getting me through anxious times For many of a certain age, their teenage years were largely spent in their bedrooms – “a world where I can go and tell my secrets to”, as the Beach Bo …
All Points East, Parklife and Lovebox festivals cancel due to coronavirus The music festival season continues to collapse amid the coronavirus crisis, with Manchester’s Parklife as well as London’s All Points East and Lovebo …
Coronavirus: the movie is somehow already here – but are we ready for it? In these times of self-isolation, it’s easy to sit back and plot the type of coronavirus movie you’d like to make. Maybe it’s one about an embattled t …
Free opera and classical for watching at home: our critics' top picks Igor Levit’s Twitter recitals How often has one of the world’s great pianists played live for you at home? Igor Levit is doing it every day for all of …
'We'll see bankruptcies': how coronavirus has shut down Australian film and TV Summary: For many Australians, the news that Tom Hanks had come down with Covid-19 in Brisbane was the moment when the reality of the Coronavirus pandemic real …
Streaming: country house murder mysteries You have to hand it to Rian Johnson. To go from directing a Star Wars franchise entry to trying out a genre widely perceived as having had its heyday …
The Perfect Candidate review – a Saudi woman's political awakening A Saudi female doctor runs for local government, causing consternation in a community still wrestling with the idea of female emancipation, in Haifaa …
System Crasher review – searing portrait of a broken psyche The central character bleeds into the craft of this superb German drama. Nine-year-old Benni (Helena Zengel) is a hostage to her own erratic impulses …
Emerald Fennell: the wickedly funny screen princess of darkness When the camera follows a young woman as she staggers around a bar, slurring her words, she is conventionally marked out as a victim. A judgmental fil …
Vivarium review – home is where the hell is In one of the creepiest episodes of the vintage American TV series The Twilight Zone, residents of the apparently idyllic Peaksville find themselves c …
Exploding the myths behind K-pop As students wait outside an exam room in Seoul’s affluent Gangnam district, the air is tense. A girl in a school uniform rocks a guitar back and forth …
Sorry: 925 review – full of disruptive ideas Summary: Part of the London scene loosely headquartered at Brixton’s Windmill pub (from Fat White Family to Goat Girl and beyond), Sorry have undergone a radic …
Influential composer Krzysztof Penderecki dies aged 86 Leading composer and conductor Krzysztof Penderecki has died at the age of 86 after a long illness, his family announced this morning. The Polish-born …
Mahler versus Slowthai! - what happened when our pop and classical critics traded jobs? Fiona Maddocks Went to the NME awards at Brixton Academy Well, I had my experience of being you, Kitty. It was quite hard. The odd thing was that, onc …
Krzysztof Penderecki obituary The Polish composer and conductor Krzysztof Penderecki, who has died aged 86, was an outstanding representative of musical modernism’s success in the …
Letter: Genesis P-Orridge obituary In the spring of 1973 I was a student organiser of the Mayfly festival planned for 1 May in Oxford. I invited Genesis P-Orridge (obituary, 16 March) t …
Mark Blum obituary Summary: The actor Mark Blum, who has died aged 69 from complications of the coronavirus, gave a memorable performance in the screwball comedy Desperately Seek …
Enigmatic, devotional, restless … a guide to Krzysztof Penderecki's music When I unearthed a score of Krzysztof Penderecki’s Symphony No 1 in my local library during my early teens, my idea of what music could be changed for …
Here's my mum with the news! Radio DJs on the switch to home-broadcasting Summary: It’s 8.15am and Radio 1 breakfast DJ Greg James is playing Stay by Alessia Cara. It’s appropriately infectious, bright and upbeat – despite the fact t …
Elephant review – Meghan Markle adds schmaltz to Disney yarn Summary: Last autumn, before she and her husband made it into their current Californian lockdown, Meghan Markle recorded the narration for this lavish new docu …
Eccentric, romantic, anarchic: Andrew Kötting's unique take on Britishness Summary: With cinemas shuttered and blockbusters blocked, this is an opportunity to explore film-makers you might usually overlook. This week, I nominate Andre …
I've never seen … 2001: A Space Odyssey Summary: I’ve never seen 2001: A Space Odyssey. There, I’ve said it. It wasn’t easy. When your job is writing about films, not having watched Stanley Kubrick’s …
Jennifer Bate obituary Summary: The organist Jennifer Bate, who has died aged 75 from cancer, was a leading exponent of the music of Olivier Messiaen. They met in 1975, when the comp …
Lockdown watch: Mark Cousins on why he's only seeing films from 1940 For absolutely no good reason, I’ve decide that the theme of my quarantine should be the number 40. To pretend to keep fit, I’ve been doing 40 sit-ups …
Bob Andy obituary The Jamaican singer-songwriter Bob Andy, who has died of cancer aged 75, enjoyed a long and fruitful career. Best known in Britain for the chart succe …
Aldeburgh festival 2020 cancelled due to coronavirus The Aldeburgh festival is the latest cultural casualty of the coronavirus pandemic. The classical music event founded in 1948 by Benjamin Britten will …
The Beautiful South: how we made Rotterdam (Or Anywhere) Paul Heaton, co-writer I wrote the lyrics to Rotterdam (Or Anywhere) sitting in a bar on the north end of Lijnbaan, Rotterdam’s main shopping street. …
Sleater-Kinney: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with All Hands on the Bad One (Kill Rock Stars, 2000) As any band that comes out of a DIY scene knows, no matter how pure your inte …
High Fidelity at 20: the sneakily dark edge of a comedy about bad breakups Rob Gordon is kind of a jerk. And High Fidelity, based on Nick Hornby’s incisive dissection of the pop-addled male brain, is about the process of him …
Waxahatchee: 'Getting sober, you’re facing this stuff shoved deep down' Katie Crutchfield pulls up in her dad’s rugged Jeep outside my hotel in a suburb of Birmingham, Alabama. She grins when I voice my surprise at her rid …
The month's best mixes: industrial dancehall, digital anxiety and 'the Techno Columbo' RA 718: Low Jack Low Jack’s Resident Advisor mix hits like a sack of bricks. Born in Honduras and based in Paris, the producer/DJ imbues his work with …
Lockdown watch: John Landis on seeking solace in Zero Mostel movies Summary: My ideas on movies to watch while you are stuck at home are really no different from a list of movies I think anyone should see at any time, not just …
Stuart Gordon obituary Summary: Horror movies don’t come much gorier, funnier or more outre than Re-Animator (1985), the HP Lovecraft adaptation that brought acclaim and infamy to St …
Chuck D says Flavor Flav still in Public Enemy, and split was a hoax Chuck D has said that Flavor Flav is still a member of Public Enemy, and his recent firing from the group was a satirical hoax. On 1 March, Chuck D sa …
My favourite film aged 12: Where Eagles Dare I was 12 in a time before there was streaming, before there was Blockbuster, when someone with a VCR in their home boasted playground status roughly e …
Wallace Roney, US jazz trumpeter, dies aged 59 from coronavirus Wallace Roney, a Grammy-winning jazz trumpeter celebrated for his interpretations of Miles Davis, has died aged 59 after contracting Covid-19. He died …
Ravi Shankar: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Raga Eternally pictured sitting cross-legged and barefoot, clutching his enormous sitar, wreathed in incense smoke with his he …
I've never seen … Breathless I’ve never seen a Jean-Luc Godard movie. Or, I hadn’t, until this assignment. I know, embarrassing, especially for a so-called film critic. I’ve long …
The Whalebone Box review – baffling, beguiling trek to a distant shore Summary: That unique artist, director and psycho-geographic savant Andrew Kötting sculpts another strange film-shamanic happening – intriguing, sometimes baffl …
Taylor Swift donates to Nashville record store hit by coronavirus Taylor Swift has made a financial contribution to a record store in her home city of Nashville that was in danger of going out of business because of …
Valley of the Lanterns review – lacklustre fairytale animation A moderate cartoon feature about an old lady called Olistene (voiced by Nicole Oliver) in a fairytale village who has the beginnings of Parkinson’s (t …
Lockdown watch: Carol Morley on danger-sneezing and the weird joy of old films Lockdown has sent me backwards in time. I’m experiencing a vicarious nostalgia, a longing to see just how much the past was a foreign country, and how …
Things Fall Apart singer Cristina reportedly dies from coronavirus The new-wave pop singer Cristina has reportedly died at age 61 after being diagnosed with coronavirus. The singer, whose full name was Cristina Monet- …
The Complex review – frustrating interactive sci-fi thriller This zeitgeist-y interactive science fiction drama posits a timely premise hingeing on isolation. On the London tube, Clare (streaming celebrity Leah …
Ellis Marsalis, jazz pianist and father to Wynton and Branford, dies aged 85 Ellis Marsalis, the jazz pianist who fathered two of America’s most celebrated jazz performers in Wynton and Branford Marsalis, has died aged 85. He i …
Dolly Parton pledges $1m to coronavirus vaccine research Dolly Parton has donated $1m (£800,000) to research into a coronavirus vaccine, as she begins a new storytelling series for children in lockdown. The …
Four Kids and It review – good-natured family fantasy There’s some gentle and good-natured fun in this family fantasy adventure, based on Jacqueline Wilson’s 2012 novel, which was itself an updating of E …
The Other Lamb review – artful cult drama simmers with unease At the outset of The Other Lamb, a disquieting little drama landing online this week, we’re dropped into familiar yet fertile territory. A charismatic …
Jeremy Marre obituary Jeremy Marre, who has died aged 76, was a British documentary maker specialising in films about popular music of every possible kind. Widely travelled …
I've never seen … any James Bond film I first became aware of James Bond in 1989, which was not, I have since learned from Bondologists, a vintage Bond era. Two film posters were ubiquitou …
Ravel: La Valse; Mussorgsky: Pictures review - brilliantly lit, punchy and athletic The third release in François-Xavier Roth’s survey of Ravel’s orchestral music with the period instruments of Les Siècles pairs two works from the yea …
Poachers turned gamekeepers: when film critics get behind the camera Summary: It was at the London premiere of Shakespeare in Love in 1999 that Henry Fitzherbert decided to seize his chance and make the leap from film reviewer o …
The top 25 most compelling Hollywood autobiographies – ranked! 25. A Story Lately Told (2013) and Watch Me (2014) by Anjelica Huston The two volumes of Anjelica Huston’s autobiography are a shrewd account of her l …
Cristina: no wave's daring darling captured the beautiful and damned For a brief moment in the early 80s, ZE Records could reasonably call itself the hippest label in the world, but it was deeply peculiar enterprise fro …
Dua Lipa: 'You have to be made of steel not to let words get to you' Summary: Dua Lipa knew two things before starting the follow-up to her massive self-titled 2017 debut: she would call it Future Nostalgia, and it would be “an …
Stefano Bollani: Variations on Jesus Christ Superstar review - jazz virtuosity driven by teenage love Stefano Bollani, the technically dazzling and hugely entertaining pianist, composer, broadcaster and writer from Milan, was once a classically trained …
Yaeji: What We Drew 우리가 그려왔던 review – dance music for an existential crisis Korean-American DJ and producer Yaeji – full name Kathy Yaeji Lee – is the queen of introverted club music. She broke through with her squelchy house …
Art imitating life: five of the best artist biopics Lust for Life Kirk Douglas is often terrifying but always lovable as Vincent van Gogh in Vincente Minnelli’s 1956 film of the Dutch painter’s struggle …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Breakdown Back in 1997, Breakdown wasn’t my – or any of my friends’ – first choice when we saw it one Saturday evening at a shopping-mall multiplex in suburban …
I’ve never seen ... Rear Window Some turned to Contagion, but the film I decided to watch in the first week of the lockdown was Rear Window, which turns out to be as close to having …
M Ward: Migration Stories review – expanding the borders of Americana A quarter of a century ago, on the song Windfall, Son Volt conjured a lyric that pretty much captures the modus operandi of M Ward: “Catching an all-n …
Minor Science: Second Language review – expectation-defying beats The inspiration behind Minor Science’s debut album is one that’s sure to resonate with many of his fellow English-speaking electronic music artists an …
Bill Withers, influential soul singer behind Ain't No Sunshine, dies aged 81 Bill Withers, the influential US soul singer who wrote Lean on Me, Ain’t No Sunshine and Lovely Day has died aged 81 of heart complications, according …
Joe Diffie obituary Between 1990 and 2004, Joe Diffie was one of the most commercially successful artists in country music, notching up more than 30 singles on Billboard’ …
Bill Withers: the brilliant folk-soul star who said it all with time to spare Plenty of rock and pop artists have unexpectedly announced their retirement, but hardly any of them have stuck to the decision. Something invariably d …
Bill Withers: his 10 greatest songs, from Lovely Day to Lean on Me Ain’t No Sunshine (Just As I Am, 1971) Questlove called Bill Withers “the last African-American Everyman … the closest thing black people have to a Br …
Lil Nas X: ‘I 100% want to represent the LGBT community’ When Lil Nas X was growing up in the small, conservative community of Lithia Springs outside Atlanta, Georgia, he was sure of two things. One: he want …
Thundercat: It Is What It Is review – love, loss and hyper-speed star jumps Few virtuoso jazz bassists could a spend a decade in a legendary thrash punk band and then swap all the shredding to tour with Snoop Dogg, purveyor of …
Nona. If They Soak Me, I’ll Burn Them review – a meandering enigma A hybrid Chilean drama that blends fiction with reality and tells of a pyromaniac granny holed up in a sleepy coastal resort after she torches a jeep: …
Sinne Eeg and the Danish Radio Big Band: We've Just Begun review – believe the hype Summary: So many superlatives have been showered upon Danish singer Sinne Eeg that you wonder whether anyone could be that good – or was this yet another case …
The Whalebone Box review – so strange it must be true Reviewing Andrew Kötting’s Lek and the Dogs in this paper in 2018, I compared his work (which straddles installations, performances, books, films and …
Mystery Jets: A Billion Heartbeats review – woke without the edge Unlikely survivors from the mid-00s glut of British guitar bands, Mystery Jets have never really deviated from the template they established with thei …
Ren Harvieu: Revel in the Drama review – a fresh start Ren Harvieu was a buzzed-about BBC Sound nominee in 2012, when she put out a passable debut of orchestral pop, made noteworthy by her smooth voice. It …
Bill Withers obituary The career of Bill Withers, who has died aged 81 of heart complications, followed an unusual trajectory. He did not try to enter the music industry un …
Alan Merrill obituary The singer and songwriter Alan Merrill, who has died aged 69 after contracting Covid-19, will be chiefly remembered for the song I Love Rock’n’Roll. M …
Horse trading: Arnold Schwarzenegger puts Whiskey and Lulu to work It is nine years since Arnold Schwarzenegger was the governor of California, but the former movie star – together with his pet donkey Lulu and miniatu …
Stayin’ alive! How music has fought pandemics for 2,700 years Disease is on the prowl. As residents hide behind locked doors, barely a footstep is heard on Milan’s cobbled streets. A strict quarantine is in effec …
Is Trolls World Tour the most important film of 2020? Few people had Trolls World Tour near the top of their list of Important Movies of 2020, but so it has come to pass. If it wasn’t for that meddling co …
Trolls World Tour review – eyeball-frazzling sequel offers same again The Trolls sequel is here: another eyeball-frazzlingly multicoloured screensaver movie for little kids, with all the aspartame hyperactivity of the fi …
What an Iranian film about a leper colony can teach us about coronavirus In the autumn of 1962, the celebrated Iranian poet Forough Farrokhzad made what would be her first and last film. Regarded as a precursor to the Irani …
'He dominated me!': the livestreaming beat battles shutting down lockdown ‘You’re bringing violins and saxophones to the war, blud!” says Skepta from behind his laptop, taunting producer Jae5 in an Instagram beat battle last …
Larry David comes out in support of Woody Allen after reading memoir Larry David has expressed his support for Woody Allen after reading the latter’s newly published autobiography, Apropos of Nothing, saying: “It’s hard …
Lockdown watch: Alex Cox on gold pyjamas and apocalyptic Alan Bennett What I do during lockdown … is pretty much what I would do anyway. Read books, stare at screens, listen to music, play with the dogs, go for walks. My …
Stevie Wonder: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Talking Book (1972) The man born Stevland Morris began the 1960s an 11-year-old harmonica prodigy and exited them as one of Mo …
Duffy praised by Rape Crisis for going public with details of ordeal A national rape charity has praised the bravery of the pop singer Duffy for going public with harrowing details of how she was drugged, held captive a …
Opera and classical concerts to watch at home: our critics' picks – week three Summary: Knussen/Ensemble Intercontemporain: Songs for Sue Searching for Oliver Knussen’s fantasy opera Where the Wild Things Are – his magical evocation of th …
Lady Gaga, Billie Eilish and Paul McCartney to play coronavirus benefit Summary: Lady Gaga is to curate One World: Together at Home, a live-streamed and televised benefit concert in support of the World Health Organization’s Covid- …
Honor Blackman, James Bond's Pussy Galore, dies aged 94 Honor Blackman, the actor best known for playing the Bond girl Pussy Galore, has died aged 94. Blackman, who became a household name in the 1960s as C …
My favourite film aged 12: The Net When interviewing an actor or director I admire, I’ve made it a personal mission to avoid sycophancy: I’m there for something resembling a business me …
Lockdown watch: Back to the Future writer Bob Gale on the lure of the past As a professional film-maker and lifetime movie buff, I have quite a collection of films, so in times of distress, my wife and I turn to the classics …
Not just Netflix: the best alternative US streaming services Summary: As people throughout the US and around the world continue to hunker inside their homes and apartments in order to combat the spread of coronavirus, th …
I watched 627 minutes of Adam Driver movies because what else am I going to do Many terrible things are discussed in the maelstrom of mayhem and misery I call my inbox – terrible, terrible things, such as requests involving me ne …
Quarantine divorcees: why Bruce Willis and Demi Moore are isolating together Names: Demi Moore and Bruce Willis. Ages: Bruce is 65, Demi 57. Appearance: A symbol of togetherness, in matching green-striped pyjamas. But I thought …
John Prine, US folk and country songwriter, dies aged 73 due to Covid-19 complications John Prine, the US folk and country singer beloved of Bob Dylan, Kris Kristofferson and more, has died aged 73 due to complications from Covid-19. Pri …
John Prine: this extraordinarily gifted songwriter was the envy of all As John Prine often pointed out, he missed the height of the 1960s. Drafted into the US army, but fortunate enough to escape a tour of duty in Vietnam …
John Tavener's 'magical' last opera to be staged for first time A newly discovered opera by Sir John Tavener is to be staged for the first time after the late composer’s friend Prince Charles flagged up its potenti …
Hal Willner: music producer and SNL supervisor dies aged 64 The music producer and long-term Saturday Night Live music supervisor Hal Willner has died aged 64. No cause of death has been confirmed, but he was s …
Joan Baez: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Diamonds and Rust (1975) Invigorated by her new creative freedom after splitting with Vanguard Records in the early 1970s, Joa …
John Prine obituary John Prine, who has died aged 73 due to complications of Covid-19, was a highly influential American singer-songwriter. Musically, his style veered be …
Sea Fever review – sturdy, slimy sci-fi horror trawls for cliches There’s going to be an understandable portion of audiences who will instantly reject the mere idea of watching the low-budget sci-fi horror Sea Fever, …
The Grand Bizarre review – trippy travelogue to who knows where Here’s a 60-minute cine-essay from the American experimental artist-animator Jodie Mack; a distinctively trippy travelogue about … well, what? The fil …
My favourite film aged 12: Close Encounters of the Third Kind Close Encounters of the Third Kind is Steven Spielberg’s family-sized late-70s UFO drama, starring Richard Dreyfuss as a midwestern Joe Schmoe who see …
Don't fear coronavirus, says Andrea Bocelli before Milan concert The Italian tenor Andrea Bocelli has encouraged people to “not be afraid” of coronavirus, as he prepares to sing in an empty Duomo di Milano on Easter …
Dreamland review – distasteful dystopian noir Tripland? Or perhaps Off-Your-Nutland? Here’s the freakiest film of the year so far, a pulpy dystopian noir with a lurid sex-trafficking storyline fro …
The Iron Mask review – Arnie slugs it out with Jackie Chan in the Tower Here is a mysteriously gigantic and interminable action-fantasy adventure – a colossal Chinese-Russian co-production that is in fact a sequel, also kn …
I've never seen … The Shawshank Redemption In a week when my home was turned into a kind of Ikea-heavy minimum security unit, and I was treated by the government like a benign 80-year-old lifer …
Beyond the Door review – peace, love and a pact with the devil Time has lent some archival interest to this Exorcist/Rosemary’s Baby horror knockoff co-directed by the veteran grindhouse maestro Ovidio G Assonitis …
Amber Heard to testify in Johnny Depp case behind closed doors Amber Heard will be allowed to give evidence about alleged sexual violence at the hands of her ex-husband Johnny Depp behind closed doors, after lawye …
Manic Street Preachers announce free arena show for NHS workers Manic Street Preachers have announced a pair of arena concerts to benefit NHS workers in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak. The trio announced the …
Donovan: 'Can you believe the Beatles and I were paying 96% tax?' Summary: Donovan, born Donovan Phillips Leitch in Scotland in 1946, was famous enough before he was 18 for the world to be on first-name terms with him. You do …
'I was shattered' – Paul Weller, Booker T and more on the day the Beatles split On 9 April 1970, a press release about a 27-year-old solo artist was sent to the media. Taking the form of a Q&A, most of it explained what his debut …
The Butthole Cut: if the rumours are true there really was a worse version of Cats Name: Cats: The Butthole Cut Age: Deleted from history in November 2019. Appearance: Imagine a worse version of Cats, the movie. I cannot. You cannot …
My favourite film aged 12 ... Conan the Barbarian The pirated VHS copy of Conan the Barbarian that I cherished when I was 12 was cruddy and discoloured even before I wore it out with twice-daily viewi …
2Pac: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Me Against the World (1995) Less than four years into his solo career, 2Pac already felt like an icon by the time he dropped M …
Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs: 'When music is loud, niggling troubles just go' Summary: When three future members of Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs Pigs first started jamming as teenagers in leafy Richmond in North Yorkshire, the locals be …
Who You Think I Am review – Juliette Binoche turns up the heat in phone sex tale Social-distancing erotic melodrama is the genre we didn’t know we needed. But now we’ve got it, in the form of this very enjoyable picture starring Ju …
I’ve never seen … Chinatown Despite the eternal sunshine, not all stories set in Los Angeles cast much of a shadow. Chinatown (1974) is one of those perceived classics that has l …
The day the Beatles broke up: fly away Paul - archive, April 1970 Beatle grip holds Paul by Jackie Leishman 11 April 1970 Paul McCartney confirmed yesterday that he had broken with the Beatles. But it seems certain t …
Radiohead's Ed O'Brien: 'Humanity has only really learned from disaster' Summary: Ed O’Brien believed Radiohead’s turbulent years were behind him. It was 2001 and the guitarist and “band mum” had tamed egos, anchored stressful tours …
Wagner: Die Walküre review - Simon Rattle shapes orchestral excellence Summary: Over the last 15 years, Simon Rattle has conducted stagings of Wagner’s Ring several times – in Aix-en-Provence, Salzburg, and Vienna – and though at …
Could coronavirus spell the end for superhero movies? After the massive 2019 hits Avengers: Endgame and Spider-Man: Far from Home, it seemed a safe bet that the Marvel Cinematic Universe would go on for e …
LA Originals: a Netflix documentary about an influential hip-hop duo Summary: It’s 1992, and two lowriders walk into a Penthouse Players record release party at the Hollywood Athletic Club. They did not arrive together, but as t …
'There seems to be a Special Tone': Why Britney Spears is a five star film critic The coronavirus crisis hasn’t been kind to performers. On a practical scale, schedules have been wiped and income reduced to zero. But psychologically …
Laura Marling: Song for Our Daughter review – the intimate album we need Laura Marling has described her seventh solo album as a kind of conceptual work. Song for Our Daughter, she says, is about “trauma and an enduring que …
Laurel Halo's lockdown listening: 'There's this element of human touch' I was joking recently that electronic musicians have been self-isolating for years, so we are practiced at this. All my gigs were cancelled, and so ti …
Adam Schlesinger obituary Summary: Adam Schlesinger, who has died aged 52 from complications of Covid-19 infection, found critical kudos and a dedicated following with his band Fountain …
Tommy Chong: 'We were always high. That was the job' Summary: Tommy Chong has got the munchies. It’s early afternoon in locked-down LA, and last night he was on the pot cookies. “My wife, Shelby, just made a whol …
Lockdown watch: Joshua Oppenheimer on three essential recent masterpieces Three recent films strike me as urgent now: At a time when we keep our distance to take care of each other, Andrey Zvyagintsev’s Loveless is an unflin …
Tom Misch's lockdown listening: 'I don’t even realise how much I’m nerding out' My debut album, Geography, was a jolly, summery record, but when I made it I was going through a breakup, I was by myself a lot, it was summer and I w …
Tigertail review – dreams, regrets and a life built on a lie Last year, Lulu Wang’s The Farewell, starring Awkwafina, tapped into Asian-Americans’ “third generation” experience of cultural dislocation and yearni …
Hailu Mergia: Yene Mircha review – ear-worming, sonically adventurous grooves Ethiopian multi-instrumentalist Hailu Mergia’s backstory is one of “world music” cliche. Gaining fame in his home country as the organ and synth playe …
The Strokes: The New Abnormal review – old magic lights fresh sparks Summary: The Strokes are back, and this time nobody likes them. At least, that’s the impression frontman Julian Casablancas seems keen to impart on the band’s …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The Bigamist Summary: Ida Lupino is the great director of noirs, thrillers and message pictures from the 1950s – an inspired film-maker to compare with Nicholas Ray and Rob …
DJ Python: Mas Amable review - 'deep reggaeton' pioneer mines lithe beats for heart and feet From dembow’s influence on Justin Bieber’s Purpose to the rise of international reggaeton superstars J Balvin and Bad Bunny, tresillo rhythms have bee …
My favourite film aged 12: Mean Girls The thing about being a teenage girl and having a favourite film that’s also about teenage girls is that even if you’re very pretentious (I was) and k …
Can Denis Villeneuve break the curse of Frank Herbert's Dune on the big screen? It’s easy to imagine why Hollywood felt it might take a maverick genius to film Dune, Frank Herbert’s 1965 sci-fi/fantasy opus. The novel, and its fiv …
Tracks of the week reviewed: the Hotrats, Rihanna and Chai The Hotrats Milkshake In lockdown, where Pringles dipped in peanut butter is an acceptable breakfast, it’s hard to know what we actually need. Do we r …
My Twitter listening parties are like gigs - but nobody nicks your beer It’s hard to write music during lockdown. A lot of songwriters I’ve spoken to just aren’t getting inspired at the moment. I did try. I wrote a song ca …
Isolation skills with Enya? The pop star masterclasses we want to see Look, you know the deal. We’re in a global pandemic, and everyone has to do what they can to help other people. It might be shopping for your elderly …
Larry Sherman, founder of pioneering dance label Trax, dies of heart failure Larry Sherman, whose record label Trax changed the face of dance music, has died of heart failure. The news was confirmed by the current head of Trax, …
Human Centipede star Dieter Laser dies aged 78 Dieter Laser, star of outrage-horror film The Human Centipede, has died aged 78. The news was announced in a post on his Facebook page, saying that th …
Mike Appleton obituary Starting with virtually no budget and the smallest studio in the BBC’s Television Centre, Mike Appleton turned The Old Grey Whistle Test into the most …
'Treated us like simpletons': Pedro Almodóvar criticises Madonna over documentary Oscar-winning Spanish film director Pedro Almodóvar has written “a settling of scores” in a long diary entry written during the coronavirus lockdown, …
Methyl Ethel, Tropical Fuck Storm, Mama Kin and more: Australian music for isolated times We’ve published a bunch of articles about how the coronavirus crisis has impacted the Australian arts industry. The damage was compounded last week wh …
Streaming: arthouse Latin America-style At a time when we’re mostly cooped up inside, looking longingly out of the window at the first blush of spring, it’s fair to say a streaming service c …
One to watch: Valentina Valentina is a bit of a secret weapon in the world of indie electronica. The English-Italian artist (surname Pappalardo) has sung on Hot Chip’s return …
On my radar: Laura Marling's cultural highlights Singer-songwriter Laura Marling was born in 1990, and brought up in a village in Hampshire. She released her debut album, Alas, I Cannot Swim, the wee …
James Elkington: Ever-Roving Eye review – a slow-burn delight “Mid-Atlantic” is usually a somewhat damning term in pop, applied to soft rock originating from, say, Croydon but aspiring to be Californian. In the c …
Yaeji: What We Drew 우리가 그려왔던 review – eclectic electronica Billed as a mixtape, Yaeji’s first full-length album is an uncategorisable treat that surfs the cusp of club music, sickly sweet pop and the blithe me …
One to watch: Jockstrap Bands often have names that summon up their sound, but not Jockstrap. Far from a macho, musky proposition, they write fantastically eccentric songs th …
Martin Margiela: In His Own Words review – philosopher of fashion This fun, nerdy follow-up to Reiner Holzemer’s 2017 documentary about Dries Van Noten takes on another Belgian fashion designer, Martin Margiela. The …
Who You Think I Am review – a thrilling web of desire There’s something peculiarly timely about this deliciously twisty, romantic thriller, with its themes of virtual isolation and physical separation. Fr …
Indie turns to Kindie as post-punk German bands woo pre-schools Summary: Fans usually age with the bands they love, but in recent months Johannes von Weizsäcker has seen the mosh pit at his gigs fill with an unusually youth …
Passions denied: my first Easter without the mysteries and joys of Bach Music has its seasons. So much, in centuries past, was written for the church year. As the days lengthen, still cool but bright, trees turning green, …
Hamilton Leithauser: The Loves of Your Life review – crooning glory Summary: Four of the five band members have reappeared as solo artists after their “extreme hiatus” announced in 2013, but it is frontman Hamilton Leithauser w …
Indie label on isle of Eigg turns lockdown into source of inspiration As the rest of the UK resists the temptation to head outside during a hot Easter bank holiday, a music label on the tiny Hebridean isle of Eigg is mak …
Grace Jones: where to start in her back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Private Life: The Compass Point Sessions (1998) “I think I’d have to say The Best of the Beatles.” So decreed Alan Partridge w …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Starcrash When the Emperor of the First Circle of the Universe (that is, Christopher Plummer, in a patent leather suit beneath silver armor, a cape and oven mit …
Where are the scary Covid-19 public information films? Volcanic explosions send rocks flying into the air. “There is now a danger that has become a threat to us all,” intones John Hurt’s voiceover. Black r …
Lockdown watch: Nick Broomfield on The Grinch, Pets and Pink Panther I wish I could send over a list of all the great films I am catching up with during the lockdown: Citizen Kane, Nanook of the North, Battleship Potemk …
What I'm really watching: golden age Hollywood comedies How to fill the evenings in these desolate times? A colleague told me she will be delving into her BFI playlist of Ingmar Bergman and Werner Herzog. I …
My favourite film aged 12: You Only Live Twice Now it’s a Wetherspoon, but back in the day it was a temple to the seventh art. They called it Sedgley Clifton. Why? I don’t know, but I like to think …
Opera and classical concerts to watch at home: our critics' picks – week four Philharmonia/Klemperer: Beethoven’s Ninth (June 1970) Otto Klemperer made his final public appearance at the Royal Festival Hall in London in 1971, bu …
American Psycho at 20: a vicious satire that remains as sharp as ever Summary: Three years after the Bret Easton Ellis novel American Psycho finally got made into a movie, after a production odyssey nearly as tortured and calamit …
Musical notes: how is pop music changing during the pandemic? We’re comfort-listening Alexis Petridis, chief music critic Last night I found myself listening to the Flaming Lips’ 1999 album The Soft Bulletin, and …
Cannes film festival says 2020 edition cannot go ahead 'in original form' The Cannes film festival has bowed to the inevitable and announced that its 2020 edition cannot go ahead in “its original form”. In a statement, festi …
'It's a triggering film': visceral South African drama Moffie From an outside perspective, South African cinema tends to announce itself through occasional breakout films rather than consistently visible director …
Brian May blames meat-eating for rise of coronavirus Brian May, guitarist with Queen, has criticised meat-eating and cited it as the cause of coronavirus, despite a lack of scientific consensus over the …
Tender and honest, Tigertail is a beacon of hope in today's tide of anti-Asian bigotry Inflamed by President Trump’s casual phrase “Chinese virus”, anti-Asian sentiment is erupting all over the world. As a British-Vietnamese person who h …
In a time of crisis, the magic of Pharrell's Happy is needed more than ever It feels like a bit of a sick joke dropped in the midst of coronavirus: it was announced on Monday that Pharrell’s Happy was the most played song on B …
Bruce Springsteen: where to start in his back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Born to Run (1975) By 1974, Bruce Springsteen was two albums deep, with a reputation as an urgent, vivid young songwriter. Mai …
The Host review – a horror for all the wrong reasons Here’s a two-for-one deal that you may find easy to resist. It’s a dull Brit flick that feels like two films boshed together: a London thriller in the …
Should I stay or should I go: how coronavirus is jeopardising music festivals For many in the live music industry, 2020 is over. Big festivals in the UK such as Glastonbury and Download are cancelled. London’s month-long Meltdow …
Why Don't You Just Die! review – ingenious drama with hints of Tarantino A macabre and ultraviolent Venus flytrap of a film from Russia that snaps shut with a steely clang. Its original title conveys a bit more succinctly w …
Rising High review – a charmer scams the Berlin property market This breezy, sleazy comedy-thriller from Germany has as its original title Betonrausch: literally, concrete-drunk or concrete-crazy – the state of ecs …
'It is part of my spiritual life': the people who take running to the extreme You might think that running around the same New York city block for 52 days straight would be an exercise in futility. Not to mention stupefyingly bo …
How a Finnish BDSM movie breathed new life into a Baroque cliche Even if you don’t listen to Classic FM or have an album called something like “Baroque Classics”, the chances are that you’d recognise Albinoni’s Adag …
Sergio review – fact-based Netflix UN drama opts for old school romance There’s an old school charm to Sergio, documentarian Greg Barker’s narrative portrait of UN diplomat Sérgio Vieira de Mello, a dramatic retelling of a …
Lee Konitz, jazz saxophonist with 75-year career, dies of coronavirus aged 92 Jazz saxophonist Lee Konitz, whose 75-year career stretched back to the big band era, has died aged 92 after contracting Covid-19. He died in a New Yo …
I've never seen … Top Gun In 1986, I was 15 and gorging myself on movies of every stripe, so why did I never see Top Gun? My subsequent admiration for Crimson Tide and Enemy of …
Rina Sawayama's lockdown listening: 'I'm fermenting stuff and playing Animal Crossing' I’m in my house with my housemate in nice Zone 3 London, with a garden and a new barbecue – though I forgot the coals, so I don’t know how we’ll cook …
Every Stephen Frears film – ranked! 24. Mrs Henderson Presents (2005) Not Frears’ finest hour – nor Judi Dench’s either. Sadly, this is a toe-curlingly coy piece of Blitz-kitsch nostalgi …
Lee Konitz obituary The music critic Gary Giddins once likened the alto saxophone playing of Lee Konitz, who has died aged 92 from complications of Covid-19, to the sound …
Can Marvel help Spider-Man's Sam Raimi escape from Hollywood purgatory? Thirteen years ago, as Sam Raimi wrapped production on Spider-Man 3, few would have imagined that it would not be until 2020 that the director of The …
Shabazz Palaces: The Don of Diamond Dreams review – alchemy in a world of algorithms Ishmael “Butterfly” Butler’s days as part of Grammy-winning golden age hip-hop group Digable Planets are almost out of sight. Few in music – let alone …
What Netflix's The Platform tells us about humanity in the coronavirus era When Galder Gaztelu-Urrutia began shooting his latest film in Bilbao almost two years ago, the Spanish director felt the themes of his low-budget, dys …
Brian Dennehy, veteran stage and screen actor, dies aged 81 Veteran actor Brian Dennehy, known for roles on stage and on screen, has died aged 81. “It is with heavy hearts we announce that our father, Brian pas …
Jean Middlemiss obituary My friend Jean Middlemiss, who has died aged 94, was a distinguished musician and teacher. Profoundly inspired by Dr Shinichi Suzuki’s innovative meth …
Rita Wilson on coronavirus and chloroquine: ‘I was so ill I could hardly stand’ Precisely when political leaders of certain countries grasped how much of a threat coronavirus really would be is a debatable issue. But for many memb …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The Kindergarten Teacher There are many things The Kindergarten Teacher, a 90-minute psychodrama now available to watch online, is not. It is not, for one, in any of the main …
'I’m just like Anne Frank, like Indiana Jones': Bob Dylan continues return to new songs Bob Dylan has continued to release his first original music in eight years, with a song in which he seemingly compares himself to Anne Frank, Indiana …
Fiona Apple: Fetch the Bolt Cutters review – a glorious eruption The re-emergence of Fiona Apple, eight years after her last studio album, is not quite dolphins returning to the waterways of Venice, but an argument …
Neverending stories: five of the best very long films Once Upon a Time in America (251 mins) Another hacked-about epic, Sergio Leone’s 1984 last feature – a brutal, baffling chronicle of gangsters in New …
My favourite film aged 12: GoldenEye Summary: Her name’s Onatopp. Xenia Onatopp … Famke Janssen’s GoldenEye character is a transparently ludicrous fantasy of a sexy, so-called “strong female chara …
Lea Bertucci: Acoustic Shadows review – mesmeric 4D sound New York composer Lea Bertucci made her name as an unorthodox saxophonist – some of her most compelling performances see her playing alto sax or bass …
Johnny Depp and Jeff Beck announce album with cover of John Lennon's Isolation Johnny Depp has announced his latest musical project, an album made with 75-year-old blues-rock guitarist Jeff Beck. Announcing the collaboration with …
Lockdown watch: Noel Clarke on Trolls, Star Wars and family binge-watching Trolls and Trolls World Tour have been the catch of the day in my house. I’ve got three kids – 11, 8 and 4 – and, to avoid the biggest tantrum, it’s m …
Everyone’s stuck at home – so why are people streaming less music? Major album releases used to be put through a Large Hadron Collider of marketing, but now almost everything making those promotion particles accelerat …
Gerry Cinnamon: The Bonny review – Scottish stadium sensation keeps it simple There’s a narrative around Scottish singer-songwriter Gerry Cinnamon that he has achieved his success – selling 50,000 tickets for Hampden Park stadiu …
‘I’m not trying to be anything I’m not’: rapper Aitch on his rise to the top I’m just back from a big shop at Sainsbury’s,” announces Harrison Armstrong with a grin over our video call. “I’m watching MasterChef, Gogglebox, eati …
Streaming: where to find the best Richard Linklater and Xavier Dolan films online Ordinarily, a week that includes new releases from directors Xavier Dolan and Richard Linklater would count as a major one in most cinephiles’ books. …
Alicia Silverstone: 'I probably behaved not as well as I could have' In Alicia Silverstone’s 1995 Rolling Stone profile, the writer Rich Cohen described the 18-year-old as “kittenish”, “the prettiest girl in town”, “dre …
Ghost Town Anthology review – unnerving supernatural mystery The death of a young man strikes at the heart of an insular, rural Quebecois community that has clearly already been soured by shared tragedies. But a …
Anne-Marie: 'I just want to make people smile' The pop star Anne-Marie has squirrelled herself away in an alcove, in a corner of a café in south London. It is the middle of February, and she has be …
Selah and the Spades review – stylish leader of the pack Writer-director Tayarisha Poe has wryly described her debut feature (which played to enthusiastic responses at Sundance last year) as “Clueless meets …
Black, blue and very bad taste: the Rolling Stones billboard that still sparks controversy Even by the standards of 1970s rock’n’roll, it was in bad taste: a billboard on Sunset Boulevard of a bruised and bound woman sitting on a gatefold co …
EOB: Earth review – Radiohead's Ed O'Brien goes eclectic “I’m not a Ronaldo or a Rooney: that’s Thom and Jonny,” said Radiohead’s second guitarist, Ed O’Brien, in 2008. “But in my dreams I’m a Paul Scholes.” …
One World: Together at Home review – locked-down stars lift the spirits With Together at Home, Lady Gaga brought together music stars from around the world to give everyone something they so desperately need at this time o …
David Bowie bassist Matthew Seligman, 64, dies of coronavirus A former bass guitarist who appeared on stage with David Bowie at the Live Aid concert has died after spending two weeks on a ventilator at St George’ …
‘Of course I smoked marijuana!’ Elliott Gould on stardom, Streisand and Elvis Presley The best review ever received by Elliott Gould – renowned actor and star of M*A*S*H and The Long Goodbye; not to mention, Ross and Monica’s dad on Fri …
Thor blimey: can Chris Hemsworth escape the post-Marvel curse? Chris Hemsworth has a tough mission in the new Netflix movie Extraction: his world-weary but well-groomed mercenary must rescue the son of an Indian d …
I've never seen ... Back to the Future It’s a classic case of being in the wrong place at the wrong time. Back to the Future was released in 1985, four years before I was born, and my early …
The Willoughbys review – imaginative animated Netflix adventure Summary: A year after Sony’s wonderfully inventive Into the Spider-Verse became the first non-Pixar/Disney/Dreamworks film to win the best animated feature Osc …
Josh Brolin sorry over lockdown visit to father James and Barbra Streisand Actor Josh Brolin has apologised after visiting his father, James, and stepmother, Barbra Streisand, during lockdown in California. In a now deleted s …
Beastie Boys Story review – Spike Jonze and the boys are back in town The release of this documentary coincides with #MeAt20, a heart-twisting craze on social media for posting pictures of yourself at 20 years old. Middl …
I've never seen ... There Will Be Blood Summary: Men try to explain things to essayist Rebecca Solnit, who called it mansplaining. Men try to get me to watch There Will Be Blood with them. You might …
The Virgin Suicides at 20: Sofia Coppola's debut continues to haunt At the centre of The Virgin Suicides, Sofia Coppola’s dreamy yet devastating adaptation of Jeffrey Eugenides’s acclaimed 1993 novel, is an unsolved my …
'They made Sex Pistols sound like Take That': the fury of Midlands punk In the late 1970s, Mike Stone changed punk for ever from the boot of a BMW. He had started Clay Records from a tiny record shop in Stoke-on-Trent, and …
Sophie Ellis-Bextor on music, motherhood and lockdown discos: ‘Most of my children are feral!’ If there has been a small moment of joy in lockdown, it was the image of a silver-clad Sophie Ellis-Bextor, sequin-spattered kids in tow, performing h …
Ronan O'Rahilly: pirate radio's godfather made a sea change in British pop Summary: Ronan O’Rahilly was nothing if not a man with a lot of ideas. The problem was that a lot of them were the kind of ideas that might lead you to think t …
My favourite film aged 12: The Charge of the Light Brigade Nineteen sixty-eight was a banner year in cinema. 2001: A Space Odyssey, Rosemary’s Baby, If..., Night of the Living Dead. I didn’t see any of these. …
Circus of Books: behind a Netflix film about a mom-and-pop gay porn shop Rachel Mason always remembers her parents telling her as a teenager not to let anyone know what they did for a living. “They used the same codes the m …
Slayer: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with Reign in Blood (1986) In 1986, thrash truly emerged from its classic, generally British, heavy metal influences, with the “big …
Planet of the Humans review – contrarian eco-doc from the Michael Moore stable Recently, petrolhead pundit Jeremy Clarkson was thought to have disgraced himself by pointing out that the hi-tech sea yacht used by Greta Thunberg fo …
Cardi B schools Bernie and Bhad Bhabie goes 'brownface': rappers in quarantine Summary: Yes, rappers and R&B stars are still losing their minds while social distancing. As the at-home boredom grows, Cardi B is turning her streams into Bro …
Disney heir criticises $1.5bn in bonuses and dividends as company cuts pay Summary: An heir to the Walt Disney fortune has criticised the company for protecting executive bonuses and dividends of more than $1.5bn (£1.2bn) while cuttin …
The Easy Bit review – how men get to grips with IVF Summary: Tom Webb’s documentary about men’s experiences of fertility treatment is a well-intentioned film on a valid subject – but I found it flawed, over-reli …
Extraction review – hokey, high-octane action thriller Sadly, this has nothing to do with dentistry. Extraction is a made-for-Netflix action thriller from veterans of the Marvel Comic Universe – screenwrit …
Midsommar May Queen costume among movie props on sale in coronavirus auction If you fancy freaking out your friends and family during lockdown, now’s your chance: you may well be able to get your hands on the bear headdress or …
'You're not welcome': rap's racial divide in France Dave’s Mercury prize-winning debut album, Psychodrama, was the biggest-selling British rap album in the UK in 2019, certified gold for selling more th …
Terry Clarke obituary My husband Terry Clarke, who has died aged 72, was a singer-songwriter of great poetic powers. He released 14 albums across a fruitful career that rev …
Astronaut review – care-home resident shoots for the stars Summary: A likable performance by Richard Dreyfuss livens up this easygoing drama about second chances and late-life adventure from actor-turned-director Shela …
Whitney Houston: 'no holds barred' biopic in the works from Clive Davis Summary: Whitney Houston’s life is set to be the subject of a big-screen biopic from the Grammy-winning producer Clive Davis and the singer’s estate. According …
Bad Education: is this Hugh Jackman's greatest performance to date? When considering the public image that Hugh Jackman has spent an illustrious three-decade career cultivating, it helps to focus on a red carpet incide …
Endless Sunshine on a Cloudy Day review – touching tribute to an Instagram influencer Summary: This feature from actor-director John Connors won the audience award at this year’s Dublin film festival, and it’s a generous, big-hearted, honest tri …
I've never seen ... Titanic I’ve never seen Titanic and always figured, what’s the point? I’ve seen bits of it, chunks of it. I know the plot, the song, the famous lines. “Draw m …
Lockdown watch: Asif Kapadia on setting his kids Hitchcock essays In our house we’ve devised a democratic rota for movie viewing. Every night one of us – me, my wife and our children, who are 13 and nine – chooses a …
Lorenzo Senni: Scacco Matto review – rave poet dials up the intensity ‘Where’s the drop?” This was a complaint often howled at festivals or in YouTube comment sections during the EDM years (usually by a hench guy in a ve …
Spotify's 'tip jar' is a slap in the face for musicians. It should pay them better Wednesday’s announcement by the government’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, that social distancing in the UK could last for the rest of the year …
Véronique Gens: Nuits review - is there another singer this compelling? Véronique Gens’s recording of Chausson’s Poème de l’Amour et la Mer was one of last year’s outstanding releases, and a song by Chausson also forms the …
Kaitlyn Aurelia Smith's lockdown listening: 'Doing handstands, that’s the time for music' I live in Los Angeles with my husband in a quiet neighbourhood that looks out on the Verdugo Hills. One of our best friends lives right behind us, so …
Do we really need a Hunger Games prequel movie? The Hunger Games movies represented a perfect storm for studio Lionsgate in the early part of the last decade. Jennifer Lawrence’s star status, combin …
The Rolling Stones release Living In a Ghost Town, first original music since 2012 The Rolling Stones have released their first original music since 2012, a new – and rather apocalyptic – single called Living in a Ghost Town. Mick Ja …
The Rolling Stones: Living in a Ghost Town review – their best new song in years The coronavirus outbreak is clearly going to inform a lot of rock and pop music in the not-too-distant future, but who would have thought that the Rol …
Lucinda Williams: 'I don't mind pushing people's buttons' Lucinda Williams has been sleep-talking more than usual. One night last week, she dreamed that Mormons invaded her house, converted her friends and st …
At the drive-in: ENO to stage opera at a safe physical distance Drive-in entertainment, a staple of 1950s America, is on its way to the UK – but not for the latest blockbuster or trashy horror film. English Nationa …
Niall Horan's lockdown listening: 'Pop is definitely at its best right now' I’m in London in my apartment, cooking – I’m making a Victoria sponge right now – and writing a lot: two songs yesterday. I had to cancel my tour, so …
My streaming gem: why you should watch My Man Godfrey Sometimes escapist films only need to take the audience a few steps, or city blocks, from reality. Gregory La Cava’s My Man Godfrey, a peerless comedy …
BC Camplight: Shortly After Takeoff review – a tumultuous pop masterpiece Brian Christinzio’s fifth album as BC Camplight is a marvel, in which currents cut across each other in a half hour or so that roils with anxiety, stu …
I've never seen ... Forrest Gump I have a good excuse. When Forrest Gump came out in 1994 and conquered the world I was an undergraduate at New York University’s film school. I was, t …
Beyoncé gives $6m to coronavirus relief, including mental health causes Beyoncé has announced a donation of $6m for mental health and other initiatives during the coronavirus outbreak. The singer teamed up with Twitter fou …
New York Metropolitan Opera hosts starry lockdown gala Glitzy galas are a regular feature of the opera calendar, but a lockdown gala – with many of the world’s best-known singers performing from their home …
Kirsty Merryn: Our Bright Night review – thieves, sailors and nuns mix heady balm As a spring like no other in our lifetime begins, Kirsty Merryn’s second album takes us into darkness. It begins at Twilight, literally, and moves us …
Taylor Swift disowns new live album, calling it 'shameless greed' Summary: Taylor Swift has disowned a new live album released under her name, calling it tasteless and “shameless greed” amid the coronavirus outbreak. The albu …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Fiona Apple, Charli XCX, Kiesza Fiona Apple I Want You to Love Me Right on time, Fiona “This world is bullshit” Apple returns to claim her throne as generational soothsayer with her …
'We had a drag queen party': the Britons in lockdown on a Panama beach If you’ve ever been at a festival on a Monday morning and thought it was something that might happen at the end of the world, you might have some symp …
John Hannah: 'I'd rather take the dog out than binge-watch TV' The wife and I are in the middle of Devs. I like a bit of sci-fi. The kids aren’t that bothered. The imagery is similar to Ex Machina. My son’s into t …
Captain Tom Moore becomes oldest artist to claim UK No 1 single Captain Tom Moore, who turns 100 on 30 April, has become the oldest artist ever to claim the UK No 1 spot with his cover of You’ll Never Walk Alone, a …
Streaming: curate your own Spike Jonze mini-season It’s been a quiet few months for Apple TV+ since the glossy hype of its launch last November, but we got a taste of their promised hipper side this we …
Diana Gordon: the secret ingredient in Beyoncé’s Lemonade It is 11am LA time and Diana Gordon is feeling, as she puts it, “hazy”. We were meant to start our interview half an hour ago, but Gordon’s sleeping p …
Les Six & Satie: Works for Piano 4 Hands review – breathless charm The group of young French composers known as Les Six came together in the early 20th century in negative reaction to weighty German romanticism and a …
Pole: 123 review – calming, abstract, minimal genius The lockdown has played havoc with album release schedules, sending new records by Haim, Rufus Wainwright, Jarvis Cocker and the Pretenders back sever …
Santrofi: Alewa review – a welcome return for Ghanaian highlife Thanks to the lasting influence of the late Fela Kuti, Nigerian Afrobeat has enjoyed a recent resurgence in the west while its close cousin, Ghanaian …
Hamilton Bohannon, disco and Motown star, dies aged 78 Summary: The US disco, funk and soul musician Hamilton Bohannon, who backed Motown’s greats before starting a respected solo career, has died at age 78. No cau …
Music From the Home Front concert shows vitality and sensitivity can coexist Summary: It won’t be forever, but this is how we watch concerts now. Almost two months into isolation, after weeks of one-off or serialised livestreamed perfor …
Extraction review – less than a marvel Chris Hemsworth (Thor) stars in this tightly choreographed action thriller about Tyler Rake, a ruthlessly efficient but emotionally constipated hired …
Astronaut review – a heartwarming trip to inner space Amid the pressures of the current crisis, we could all use some uplifting, unchallenging, bittersweet sentimentality. That’s exactly what’s on offer f …
Lennon Stella:  Three. Two. One. review – a serene debut Lennon Stella was once half of the Canadian kid sister act Lennon & Maisy, who went viral in 2012 when they covered a Robyn song with margarine tub pe …
Sneakbo: 9 Lives review – joie de vivre from Afro bashment star Summary: The story goes that south London rapper Agassi Odusina – known to most as Sneakbo – once turned into a black cat when visiting Brixton McDonald’s. It’ …
The Metropolitan Opera’s At-Home Gala review – thrilling singing, live from the stars’ living-rooms In many ways, it was quite extraordinary. Streamed on its website, the Metropolitan Opera’s At-Home Gala, featured more than 40 of the house’s regular …
My favourite film aged 12: The Delinquents Summary: January 1990: the first month of a thrilling new decade. I am embracing the mood by jumping on the 111 bus from my small South Walian village, jetting …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The Killing of America The first thing we’re met with are title cards informing us: “All of the film you are about to see is real. Nothing has been staged.” This is immediat …
How 1968 TV drama The Year of the Sex Olympics predicted our world We’ve all seen Brian Cox playing a fearsome media magnate with a perhaps non-coincidental resemblance to certain real-life figures. But many people wo …
Wiley: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Godfather (CTA Records, 2017) Wiley told the world: “Eskiboy’s the reason why everybody’s here” back in 2006, on the cult clas …
Ahmed Ismail Hudeidi obituary The musician Ahmed Ismail Hudeidi, who has died aged 91, was the acknowledged king of the oud, a short-necked, lute-type instrument that is widely pla …
Opera and classical concerts to watch at home: our critics' picks – week six Quatuor Danel (Philharmonie de Paris) The French string quartet should have been a significant presence at the Wigmore Hall this spring, playing Shost …
Netflix announces surprise Michelle Obama documentary Netflix has announced a new original documentary focused on former first lady Michelle Obama to be released on 6 May. Becoming will follow Obama on he …
Breaking Glass review – a suite of female composers smashing the mould for Australian arts “There is no reason for the sudden terror, the feeling of condemnation,” the poet Sylvia Plath wrote in her diaries, “except that circumstances all mi …
The films that made us: BFI to archive best coronavirus videos From Joe Wicks’s high energy PE lessons to Boris Johnson’s “mild symptoms” video tweet to recreating a daily commute in the shower, online video is pl …
You, in your bedroom, with your laptop. That's not the future of film festivals Every year, at Cannes (and other festivals) there’s a plaintive argument about what Cannes (or other festivals) are really all “about”. Some Savonarol …
Pandemic forces Academy to break with Oscars tradition for streaming films The Academy Awards will for the first time allow films that debuted on a streaming service without a theatrical run to be eligible for nominations, a …
Irrfan Khan dies aged 53 Irrfan Khan, one of Bollywood’s most beloved stars who had achieved considerable success in the west, has died aged 53. He had been admitted to the in …
Blood Quantum review – grimy zombie horror offers intriguing twist Given how movies about the undead refuse to die, a tweak on what’s become a decaying formula is always a welcome surprise, especially if said tweak in …
Jay-Z takes action against 'deepfakes' of him rapping Hamlet and Billy Joel Jay-Z’s company Roc Nation have filed takedown notices against “deepfake” videos that use artificial intelligence to make him rap Billy Joel’s We Didn …
Irrfan Khan: a seductive actor capable of exquisite gentleness Irrfan Khan was a distinguished and charismatic star in Hindi- and English-language movies whose hardworking career was an enormously valuable bridge …
Can You Keep a Secret? review – dull, strangers-on-a-plane romcom It’s hardly a secret, more of a golden rule, but someone here has clearly forgotten that comedy has to be funny. Instead, Elise Duran’s adaptation of …
My favourite film aged 12: Back to the Future II I am rubbish at concentrating, sitting still and keeping my mouth shut, traits particularly intense when I was young. Consequently, my interests range …
Britney Spears: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Blackout (2007) “There’s only two types of people in the world,” Britney Spears sang on the title track of her 2008 album, Cir …
A Secret Love review – moving portrait of two women's 60-year romance Summary: This documentary from Netflix is a real heart-soother. Directed with tremendous sensitivity and intimacy by Chris Bolan, it’s a love story about two w …
The curse of Mr Darcy: did Colin Firth's beloved performance really damage his career? Name: Mr Darcy. Age: 207, 28, 35, 25, depending on how you look at it, really. Eh? Well, Pride and Prejudice was published in 1813, so you could say F …
Odeon bans all Universal Pictures films as studio skips cinema releases Summary: Odeon Cinemas has banned screenings of all films from the Fast & Furious maker Universal Pictures after the studio said it would break with tradition …
Reborn review – pretentious schlock-horror thrills Horror buffs will be psyched about this release of a 2018-made feature with a stellar pedigree, although the end result is a bit of pup. It plays out …
Oscars on demand: will the Academy be able to put the streaming genie back in the bottle? ‘What about the Oscars?” might not be the question at the top of your mind as you consider the manifold uncertainties raised by the coronavirus pandem …
Ema review – a sexual odyssey, with flame-throwers Pablo Larraín’s Ema is woozy, difficult, intense: superbly composed and yet opaque and perhaps only semi-coherent. It’s a study in anger and emotional …
Back to the future: are drive-in theaters the future of safe cinema trips? Most of America’s cinemas have gone dark in the coronavirus pandemic, but attendance at the Ocala drive-in in Florida is surging. Seven nights a week, …
Diana Kennedy: Nothing Fancy review – fiery queen of Mexican cuisine The 97-year-old food writer Diana Kennedy is the very model of something rarely seen today, or even 20 or 30 years ago: the formidable Englishwoman ab …
Echoes of today's UK revealed in Rock Against Racism's 1970s struggle Contemporary Britain is battling far-right rhetoric similar to that which divided the country in the 1970s, with the Brexit debate revealing how polit …
The Family Way review – potent portrait of sex in the swinging 60s ‘It’s life, lad. It might make you laugh at your age, but one day it’ll make you bloody cry.” After 54 years, this British movie from the Boulting bro …
DAU. Degeneration review – shocking, six-hour satire of Soviet science Earlier this year at the Berlin film festival, I saw the brutal and bizarre DAU. Natasha. It is one of 14 feature films that have come out of the extr …
The Assistant review – #MeToo drama offers unsettling study of day-to-day abuse Summary: A hundred micro-aggressions add up to one macro horror, a thousand petty humiliations snowball into a big swallowed insult, a million infected paper c …
Beyond the negroni: Stanley Tucci's 20 best films – ranked! 20. Beauty and the Beast (2017) Stanley Tucci plays Maestro Cadenza in this recent version of Beauty and the Beast, a florid and neurotic musical star …
Rishi Kapoor: cherubic child star who became an indefatigable leading man The story of Rishi Kapoor is a love story: he was loved as the chubby and cherubic child star who morphed into an irresistible, indefatigable romantic …
Irrfan Khan obituary Summary: The charismatic actor Irrfan Khan, who has died aged 53 from a colon infection following diagnosis of a neuroendocrine tumour, had a successful career …
Schoenberg: Pelleas und Melisande; Erwartung review – dramatic extremes No two works in Schoenberg’s output better illustrate the scale of the musical journey he undertook in the first decade of the 20th century than Pelle …
Gael García Bernal: 'The pandemic has taught me that I need something to say' At the start of the century, the director Alfonso Cuarón was casting Y Tu Mamá También, the bawdy but plangent road movie he had written with his brot …
Belle and Sebastian's lockdown listening: 'I have a dance-off with my kids every night' Belle and Sebastian were meant to go to the US to make a record when lockdown was announced, but, thankfully, we had enough time to cancel everything …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The Stranger In these lockdown times, we should all be scrambling to watch films that will help us to make sense of our out-of-life experience, no? Pandemic thrill …
Laura Jurd’s Dinosaur:  To the Earth review – eloquent and spirited Anybody accumulating evidence for the existence of old souls could do worse than check out the Hampshire-born trumpeter-composer Laura Jurd’s contribu …
All Day and a Night review – stylish Netflix father-son crime drama Summary: It’s an unusually stacked week for new films on Netflix (one they might regret when pre-pandemic content starts to dry up) with a teen comedy, a B-thr …
Mahalia's lockdown listening: 'Quarantine has been difficult for my confidence' I had a couple of friends staying with me just before lockdown happened and we were like: “Let’s do it together”. Having my friends and partner with m …
My favourite film aged 12: The Notebook Flash back to the summer of 2007: Spider-Man 3 was in theatres. Two of the top five most viewed YouTube videos were by the band My Chemical Romance. A …
'It's DIY TV': Daniel Hope on performing to millions from his living room Summary: ‘You’d better unpack.” I was outside my home in Berlin in my car. I had just loaded it up and strapped the kids into their seats when my manager calle …
Tony Allen: the Afrobeat pioneer's 10 finest recordings Listen to a playlist of Ammar’s selections: Fela Kuti: Roforofo Fight (Roforofo Fight, 1972) Roforofo Fight is the earliest cohesive expression of Ton …
Tony Allen: the Afrobeat maverick who blazed a trail across the globe Few musicians can claim to have invented a revolutionary rhythm, but then few are quite like the late Afrobeat pioneer Tony Allen. Brian Eno called hi …
I've never seen … Solaris At university in the early 90s, friends who were studying philosophy would enthuse about Solaris in the same smoke-filled breath as Hegel and Sartre – …
'We stick to the rules': why cinemas in Sweden have stayed open during the pandemic Showing a film in a cinema has become an act of political consequence. Movie theatres across the globe, from China to the US, have shut down during th …
Ghostpoet: I Grow Tired But Dare Not Fall Asleep review – dark but defiant Summary: Ghostpoet – the brooding alias of south London-born Obaro Ejimiwe – is roughly a decade old this year. This dour bard has long been an artist ahead of …
One to watch: Baby Rose It’s unusual these days for a voice you haven’t heard before to cut like a thorn. That, however, is the immediacy of Baby Rose’s talent. The 25-year-o …
Studios bypass cinemas with lucrative lockdown premieres An animated musical extravaganza about a group of pop-loving trolls may turn out to be the most important film in recent Hollywood history. Trolls Wor …
Tom Green Septet: Tipping Point review – seamless flow Summary: In the freelance world of British jazz, a band that manages to stay in existence long enough to record its second album is something of a rarity. But …
Perfume Genius: 'I'm constantly demanding a big feeling' Until recently, Mike Hadreas was not a particularly emotional person. That may come as a surprise to fans of Perfume Genius, the name under which he r …
Once again Michael Moore stirs the environmental pot – but conservationists turn up the heat on him Planet of the Humans is an environmental documentary that has enraged renewable energy experts and environmentalists, with some calling for its high-p …
The Assistant review – eloquent sexual harassment drama Summary: A performance of few words but immense physical eloquence by Julia Garner anchors this impressively chilling #MeToo-era drama about workplace harassme …
Britt Ekland on Peter Sellers: ‘He was a very tormented soul’ Peter Sellers is widely admired as a British comic genius, the creator of some of the most memorable characters of 20th-century film and broadcasting. …
Car Seat Headrest: Making a Door Less Open review – Will Toledo in yet another guise There’s a strange psychological cross-pollination going on behind the mask that Will Toledo, the artist mostly known as Car Seat Headrest, sports on t …
Drake: Dark Lane Demo Tapes review – rap’s whingeing king hits a dead end In a world where the boundary between mixtapes and albums is becoming ever more blurred, the title of Drake’s latest album highlights its interstitial …
Tony Allen obituary On 12 and 13 March there were two concerts in the Church of Sound series at St James the Great Church in Clapton, east London. They were staged in the …
Rishi Kapoor obituary Rishi Kapoor, who has died aged 67 of bone marrow cancer, starred as a leading man in almost 100 Bollywood films and was a member of the remarkable Ka …
50 Cent on love, cash and bankruptcy: ‘When there are setbacks, there will be get-backs’ Curtis Jackson has downsized. The rapper/actor/businessman, better known as 50 Cent, used to live in a palace of a house formerly owned by Mike Tyson. …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Paddleton Summary: The opening credits of Paddleton play over images of its dual protagonists, Michael (Mark Duplass) and Andy (Ray Romano), hitting a tennis ball agains …
'A short but vibrant life': revisiting the life and death of Natalie Wood Natasha Gregson Wagner was 11 years old when her mother, the actor Natalie Wood, drowned off Catalina Island on Thanksgiving weekend, 1981. Wagner’s r …
Joanna Lumley: 'I adore Gogglebox but I'd be hopeless. I watch TV in silence' I’m here with my husband. We’ve got Netflix, thank god, so we binge. I adore Call My Agent, which is the French one about a Parisian talent agent who …
'His drums were singing, you know?' Tony Allen remembered by his collaborators Femi Koleoso My dad used to play Fela Kuti records to me – some of my earliest musical memories are those records playing in the car. Later on I wonde …
Becoming review – tantalising tour of Michelle Obama's life Michelle Obama is a class act – one of the classiest – and her intelligence and poise now look like something from a lost golden age. The publication …
Shaun of the Dead: Edgar Wright and Simon Pegg on their zombie classic Edgar Wright, director and writer Simon Pegg was the first person I’d ever met who was as obsessed with George Romero’s Dawn of the Dead as I was. One …
The Kinks: where to start in their back catalogue Summary: The album to start with The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society (1968) When the Kinks’ abominable onstage behaviour caused the American F …
Your streaming gems: what under-seen films would you recommend? With a global pandemic forcing us all inside, figuring out what to watch has become a more important decision than ever before and with an expanding n …
Did Gladiator really deserve the best picture Oscar? When Gladiator was released in early May 2000, there wasn’t much of an inkling that it would go on to win the Oscar for best picture, for the obvious …
Techno DJ Kelly Lee Owens: ‘I still have to fight to not be seen as just the singer’ Kelly Lee Owens is showing me her crumpled bed, pixelated on the screen. It is five weeks into quarantine and this has quickly become the norm: an int …
Dave Greenfield: putting beauty at the rotten heart of the Stranglers Summary: Music writer Pete Paphides’ recent memoir, Broken Greek, contains a vivid description of its seven-year-old author encountering the Stranglers for the …
Lost Bob Dylan lyrics from Blonde on Blonde era go to auction A page of Bob Dylan’s manuscript featuring lyrics for Blonde on Blonde, regarded by many as his greatest ever album, is being auctioned by Sotheby’s i …
I've never seen ... The Terminator I bonded with my best university buddy over many things: student radio, bland pasta, failing to talk to girls at parties, and the paradoxes of time tr …
Hilary Bracefield obituary Summary: A true polymath, writing on a wide range of subjects from Stravinsky to the poetry of her fellow New Zealander Fleur Adcock, my friend and one-time co …
Disney takes $1.4bn hit as parks shuttered and production halted The coronavirus pandemic has cost Walt Disney $1.4bn in the last three months as the virus shut down its theme parks around the world and halted film …
Sleazy bosses, exploited barmaids: US cinema finally discovers the left behinds Summary: ‘I wanted it to be relatable to any woman who’s ever worked in an office,” says Kitty Green of her new film The Assistant. “Everything in the film has …
Stephen Merchant: 'Harrison Ford would find a shop selling toilet roll' Summary: I’m locked down in London with my girlfriend and we do a movie a night. I tend to curate – not because I’m dictatorial, but because she’s not that int …
'My favourite forgotten film' – you recommend your best streaming gems Sunday’s Illness A Spanish film featuring the troubled reunion between a fortysomething daughter and the mother who abandoned her 30 years ago. An unu …
'It's a tough island to live on': why coronavirus spells doom for Ibiza Ibiza welcomes more than three million visitors during the summer months, pumping billions into its economy. Close to 75% of the island’s 147,000-plus …
Spaceship Earth review – intriguing Biosphere 2 documentary lacks insight It’s become all too easy, and all too lazy, to look at every new piece of art in the context of the coronavirus. So Normal People is now maybe about t …
I've never seen ... Doctor Zhivago Doctor Zhivago barely figured on my radar at a time when I was more interested in James Bond and the Beatles than romance, and I never caught up with …
Millie Small, My Boy Lollipop singer, dies aged 73 Millie Small, the Jamaican singer known for her global 1964 hit My Boy Lollipop, has died aged 73. Island Records founder Chris Blackwell, who origina …
The Shed review – goofy, gory vampire horror Orphaned teenager Stan (Jay Jay Warren) has been forced to live with his abusive grandfather Ellis (a nearly unrecognisable Timothy Bottoms, once a ch …
Laurie Anderson: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Big Science (1982) It was the 1981 breakout O Superman that flung multimedia artist Laurie Anderson to No 2 in the UK singles …
UK cinemas lobbying government for June reopening The UK cinema industry is understood to be lobbying the government to approve a proposed reopening scheme that would see venues welcome customers by t …
Camino Skies review – touching study of a pilgrimage of hope Here’s a gentle, somewhat plodding documentary following six strangers as they hike the 500-mile Camino de Santiago pilgrimage that ends in north-west …
Martin Lovett obituary The cellist Martin Lovett, who has died aged 93 after contracting Covid-19, acted as the musical conscience of the Amadeus String Quartet. When the pl …
Florian Schneider, Kraftwerk co-founder, dies aged 73 Summary: Florian Schneider, who as one of the founding members of German group Kraftwerk changed the sound of pop music forever, has died aged 73 of cancer. Th …
Millie Small obituary With international sales of 5m copies in 1964, the year of its release, the hit single My Boy Lollipop, sung by Millie, who has died aged 72, “opened …
The Wretched review – by-the-numbers, unscary horror movie The title has been applied blankly and pretty arbitrarily to a by-the-numbers, unscary movie from US indie film-makers, the Pierce brothers, Drew and …
Briggs v Tim Minchin, Kit, Josh Pyke and others: Australia's best music for May Briggs and Tim Minchin – Housefyre For fans of: AB Original, Urthboy, Tism Isolation has led to many creative artistic collaborations over the past fe …
Florian Schneider: the enigma whose codes broke open pop music Summary: Florian Schneider’s death came shrouded in a degree of secrecy. Gossip among fans about his health was first provoked at the end of April, when his fe …
Never Rarely Sometimes Always review – tough, realist abortion drama Summary: The four words in this title are the four possible replies to bureaucratic tick-box questions about the frequency of your various sexual experiences. …
I've never seen … Four Weddings and a Funeral So here’s the plot of Four Weddings and a Funeral as I imagine it. Hugh Grant, playing a home counties type called Archie who has replanted himself in …
More Beautiful for Having Been Broken review – utterly bizarre stilted soap opera In 2003, self-financed LA movie director Tommy Wiseau stunned audiences with his film The Room: a legendary cult jawdropper, whose making was immortal …
'It's useful for viewers today': the film about a two-year voluntary isolation In September 1991, the final year of the Soviet Union and the beginning of a significant decline in trips to outer space, four men and four women donn …
Romantic Comedy review – our love affair with the romcom With affection and brio, Elizabeth Sankey reclaims the genre of romantic comedy in this watchable documentary; that is, she reclaims it from the gende …
Kehlani: It Was Good Until It Wasn't review – talent shines in pansexual soap opera By anyone’s standards, Kehlani Parrish has experienced a pretty tumultuous rise to fame. She pulled off the not-inconsiderable feat of emerging from a …
Can Taika Waititi revive the cosmic sweep of classic Star Wars? When entertainment reporters play Hollywood roulette, the practice of attaching directors and stars to forthcoming movies based on little more than ru …
In Search of Greatness review – is 'moneyball' killing sporting genius? This rather slight documentary on talent and genius in sport is chatty and anecdotal, but could perhaps have been boiled down further to a crisp hour- …
Sing like a canary! The whistling consultant who taught Romanian noir gangsters a tune Summary: Try to imagine the least film-noir scene possible and you might come up with a group of five-year-olds learning to whistle. It is late morning, pre-lo …
Beethoven, Brahms review - Sokolov finds radical Beethoven For over a decade now, the British government’s stringent visa requirements for visiting musicians from outside the EU have ensured that Grigory Sokol …
Kraftwerk: their 30 greatest songs, ranked! 30. Expo 2000 (1999) Kraftwerk’s first new and original music since 1986, this single started as a commissioned jingle for the Hanover Expo 2000 world …
Robert De Niro: 'I'd like to play Cuomo in pandemic movie' Summary: Robert De Niro has said he would be keen to play New York state governor Andrew Cuomo in a future movie about the coronavirus epidemic, as the actor m …
Notting Hill carnival 2020 cancelled due to coronavirus Notting Hill carnival, one of the biggest cultural events in the UK that attracts more than a million people each year, has been cancelled due to coro …
My favourite film aged 12: Fly Away Home Summary: My love for Fly Away Home coincided with moving to the countryside; where my mum and I had lived in cul-de-sac after cul-de-sac, our new home was surr …
Brian Howe, hard rock singer who fronted Bad Company, dies aged 66 Brian Howe, the singer who fronted the British rock supergroup Bad Company for eight years, has died aged 66. He had a heart attack at his Florida hom …
Ty, Mercury prize-nominated UK rapper, dies aged 47 of coronavirus Ty, the acclaimed UK hip-hop star who was nominated for the Mercury prize for his album Upwards, has died aged 47 after contracting coronavirus. A fun …
'When a woman raps, she spitting!' Megan Thee Stallion, the hot girl taking over hip-hop Summary: Given that her lyrical prowess has made her one of the hottest rappers in the US, it’s hardly surprising that Megan Thee Stallion is good at anecdotes …
'We do what we want, for ourselves': why it's a golden age for women in rap Summary: Much like the rest of the music industry, hip-hop, rap and grime have traditionally been male-dominated spaces. Finally, though, things are changing. …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The Most Dangerous Game Some film tropes get wheeled out so often they create their own furrow. Perhaps that’s why the timeworn premise of “man hunting man” has evolved into …
'It's a mistresspiece!': the 14-hour film about forgotten female directors Summary: A perfect lockdown gift has landed, one which might have sounded daunting in ordinary times: a 14-hour documentary about female directors, which goes …
I've never seen ... 8½ Maybe you’re the kind of person who buys a new outfit on Saturday afternoon and then wears it the very same evening. That’s not me. Dresses hang unwor …
Brian May taken to hospital after tearing buttock muscles while gardening Brian May has complained of “relentless pain” after he was taken to hospital following a gardening injury that tore muscles in his buttocks – and, whi …
All together now: five of the best kids' films that adults can enjoy Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Kidult superhero movies are nothing new, but this 2018 animated splinter off the Sony-Spidey combine does something …
Blake Mills: Mutable Set review – an ethereal journey into pop's avant garde Blake Mills has picked up Grammy nominations for his production work on Laura Marling’s Semper Femina, John Legend’s Darkness and Light and Perfume Ge …
Place: Ecuador review – a wild night in Quito While most would name Colombia as the home of South America’s forward-thinking club scene, neighbouring Ecuador has quietly been carving out its own d …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Katy J Pearson, Cher Lloyd, the 1975 Katy J Pearson Take Back the Radio A softly psychedelic sashay into the first whispers of summer, Take Back the Radio is an addictive whoop of pure jo …
Kim Petras's lockdown listening: 'My fans have truly kept me sane' Isolation has definitely been a test, but I’m really lucky: I’m able to work on new music while quarantined with my best friends in Toluca Lake, Los A …
Ty: a dextrous artist who wove threads of UK rap culture together Summary: The death of British rapper Ty, aged 47, to complications from coronavirus came as a shock because it had appeared he was on his way to recovery after …
My favourite film aged 12: Gold Summary: The pre-eminent film in Sir Roger Moore’s non-Bond oeuvre was released in 1974, between Live and Let Die and The Man With the Golden Gun. I was born i …
Friday the 13th at 40: the maligned slasher that's haunted pop culture Before production on the teen slasher A Long Night at Camp Blood had even started, before a final draft of the screenplay had even been submitted, thi …
Streaming: the joy of romcoms Romantic comedies are a perennially undervalued genre: even very fine ones are often described as “guilty pleasures”. That’s always a nonsense term, g …
Arion: Voyage of a Slavic Soul review – rich lyricism from Natalya Romaniw Born in Swansea of Ukrainian descent, the outstanding young soprano Natalya Romaniw was singing – stunningly – the title role of Puccini’s Madam Butte …
One to watch: Jetta “You can be very creative using very little… I actually prefer having less to work with because that way you need to use more of your imagination,” th …
Hayley Williams: Petals for Armor review – one of the year's biggest revelations Maturity is an often derided concept in a youth-facing art form. But when Simmer, a song about repressed feminist rage buoyed by creepy electronics – …
Could a 12-year-old Australian-Chinese violinist be the next child prodigy? The classical music world is no stranger to young talent. The 19th century virtuoso Niccolò Paganini started playing aged seven, while Yehudi Menuhin …
Andre Harrell, founder of influential R&B label Uptown Records, dies aged 59 Andre Harrell, founder of the influential R&B and hip-hop label Uptown Records, has died. He was 59. The cause of Harrell’s death, which was announced …
What made 60s music giants so great? Jamming says Bob Dylan's son Bob Dylan’s son, the musician and performer Jakob Dylan, has urged young people to get together in person to make music in the future and not to rely …
Watkins Family Hour: Brother Sister review – a model of sibling harmony Summary: California’s Sean and Sara Watkins are akin to royalty in American folk circles, firstly as founding members of the hugely successful Nickel Creek, an …
Little Richard: an ultra-sexual force of anti-nature Little Richard’s Rip It Up entered the UK top 30, right at the bottom, in December 1956. It looked up at a chart that included Bill Haley and Elvis Pr …
Little Richard, rock'n'roll pioneer, dies aged 87 Little Richard, one of the pioneers of the first wave of rock’n’roll, has died. He was 87. Richard, whose real name was Richard Penniman, was born in …
'He hit us like a bolt of lightning': stars pay tribute to Little Richard Among tributes to Little Richard, the rock’n’roll pioneer who died on Saturday aged 87, came praise for his songwriting, his musicianship, his audacio …
Conservation society clashes with Disney over missing historic letters Disney, titan of the media and entertainment world, has enraged a group of Londoners attempting to preserve one of Soho’s best-known squares. And the …
Never Rarely Sometimes Always review - profoundly moving abortion drama From Eliza Hittman, the remarkable writer-director of It Felt Like Love and Beach Rats, comes another drama that manages to blend the gritty authentic …
Himesh Patel: ‘It felt odd making a show about a pandemic’ The so-called “curse of EastEnders” – the struggle for soap actors to transition into more prestigious dramatic roles after leaving the show – always …
Moses Sumney: Græ Part Two review – introspective magic This second suite of songs completes Moses Sumney’s 20-track double album Græ, a tour de force about “the duelling forces” in oneself that places the …
I Break Horses: Warnings review – more woozy synthscapes Having started out as a My Bloody Valentine-indebted shoegaze duo, I Break Horses had become a solo vehicle for Swedish singer-songwriter Maria Lindén …
The Wretched review – grisly holiday horror In a parallel universe, this lean, surprisingly grisly horror from brothers Brett and Drew Pierce (Deadheads) might have been a teen movie. Set during …
Kehlani: It Was Good Until It Wasn't review – intimate second album Across her solo releases, Oakland, California artist Kehlani has channelled a nostalgic kind of poppy R&B. That the former America’s Got Talent star’s …
The best albums of 2020 so far Fiona Apple Fetch the Bolt Cutters Apple’s prettily meandering piano can at first seem benign, even whimsical, but this album – already being regarded …
Musicians call for industry shake-up to protect artists during lockdown Two organisations that represent thousands of British musicians and songwriters will today launch a Keep Music Alive campaign calling for urgent chang …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Nobody's Watching What happens when a man who is accustomed to being the centre of attention finds himself becoming invisible? When a life busked from cash in hand jobs …
My favourite film aged 12: Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade It was 1994, and I was 12 years old. My dad had recently bought himself a Hi8 video camera and I requisitioned it to make my own movies. Given my sub- …
Disney reopens its Shanghai theme park, with many restrictions Summary: Disney has reopened its Shanghai theme park with new physical distancing rules preventing Mickey Mouse from posing with customers, more than three mon …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 20, Carly Rae Jepsen – Call Me Maybe There are No 1 pop songs you hear everywhere you go and soon hope never to hear again; and then there are pop songs that, to quote the critic Robert C …
Cannes abandons 'physical' festival for 2020 but will select films for screening elsewhere The Cannes film festival appears to have halted any plans for a physical edition for 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic, but is aiming to sponsor sc …
Grateful Dead: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with American Beauty (1970) It is easy for people unfamiliar with their music to dismiss the Grateful Dead as amorphous jamming for …
Betty Wright obituary The singer and songwriter Betty Wright, who has died of cancer aged 66, occupied a significant position in African-American music across six decades, …
Sandrey Date obituary Summary: My friend Sandrey Date, who has died aged 76, spent his entire working life as a music librarian in Bournemouth, from which base he was a bedrock of t …
Capone review – Tom Hardy entertainingly feral as a gangster at the end of the road Josh Trank is the film-maker who took flight in 2012 with his brilliant superhero-nerd fantasy Chronicle, but then found the wind beneath his wings va …
Opera and classical concerts to watch at home: our critics' picks – week eight Schreker: Der Schmied von Gent This Opera Ballet Vlaanderen extravanganza is Bruegel gone psychedelic. Staged at the opera house in Ghent, where the o …
'Glimmer of hope': leading performers return to London's Wigmore Hall The BBC and the Wigmore Hall on Tuesday announced a concert series that will see leading musicians return to the London stage for the first time since …
‘I’m genuine – and a bit strange’: emo rapper Yung Lean bares his soul It is a bright April afternoon, and Yung Lean is strolling down a Stockholm street, iPhone aloft. The rapper – real name Jonatan Leandoer Håstad – is …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 19, Lil Nas X – Old Town Road In 2011, NPR estimated that it cost around $78,000 (£61,600) to make a chart hit – and that was without a video or promotion. Nearly a decade later, w …
Coronavirus: Bryan Adams attacks China as 'bat eating, virus making' source Bryan Adams has made an expletive-filled attack on Chinese people over coronavirus, in the week he was due to start a concert residency at the Royal A …
'My studio is an extra limb right now': bedroom pop, the perfect genre for lockdown ‘I’m famous for staying in,” says R Stevie Moore, writer of the new wave number I Like to Stay Home. “So quarantine is no big deal.” But as a counterc …
Unleash hell! How Gladiator went from on-set disasters to box office glory Name: Behind-the-scenes disasters. Age: Eternal. As old as art itself. Prehistoric man (and, of course, woman) probably came to blows about what colou …
Have a Good Trip: celebrities share wild psychedelic stories for Netflix A lifelong comedy writer, Donick Cary knows full well that some entertainers radiate a sort of effortless interestingness. They’re good off the cuff, …
Too black, too queer, too holy: why Little Richard never truly got his dues As the world marks and mourns the passing of Little Richard, many have been asking: how was someone so unapologetically black and queer present at the …
Reading and Leeds festival cancelled due to coronavirus Reading and Leeds festival, the two-city weekender that is one of the UK’s biggest outdoor events, has been cancelled due to the coronavirus crisis. O …
Bryan Adams apologises after 'bat eating' coronavirus rant The Canadian singer-songwriter Bryan Adams has apologised after an outburst on Instagram where he attacked “bat eating, wet market animal selling, vir …
UK live music and festival sector at risk of collapse due to coronavirus The British independent festival sector is at risk of collapsing, with many cancelled events falling through the cracks of government support measures …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 18, Ian Dury and the Blockheads – Hit Me With Your Rhythm Stick With its distinctive 16-notes-to-the-bar bassline and unashamedly honky sax solo (played on two saxes at once), Ian Dury and the Blockheads’ signature …
Kate Bush: where to start in her back catalogue Summary: The album to start with The Dreaming (1982) When Big Boi from Outkast said that The Dreaming, the worst performing of Kate Bush’s 10 studio albums, wa …
Proximity review – campy sci-fi close encounters This dorky, silly sci-fi feature offers a weird blend of high-grade craftsmanship (especially from the visual effects, cinematography and music depart …
Woody Allen's A Rainy Day in New York tops global box office A Rainy Day in New York, the Woody Allen film disowned by high-profile members of its cast and whose US release was cancelled by its original backer, …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 17, Kylie Minogue – Can't Get You Out of My Head Summary: Last month, Kylie Minogue shared on Instagram a viral video of a dog, eyes closed in blissful repose, nodding along to its favourite song. The tune in …
Cassandro, the Exotico! review – melancholic portrait of wrestling star Film-maker Marie Losier gives us a brief, impressionistic documentary portrait of the Mexican wrestling star who describes himself as the “Liberace of …
Matt Damon says his Ireland lockdown feels like 'a fairytale' Summary: Matt Damon says lockdown in Ireland feels like a fairytale, that the country’s taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, is a “badass” and that he worries about return …
Amy Winehouse's stilettos in Island Records auction for coronavirus A pair of stilettos worn by Amy Winehouse and handwritten lyrics by Bono are among the most eye-catching items in an auction being run by Island Recor …
Tom Hardy's 20 best film performances – ranked! 20. Rocknrolla (2008) There aren’t as many mockney-geezery roles in Tom Hardy’s career as you might think, although he has a turn in this and also in …
Perfume Genius: Set My Heart on Fire Immediately review – pop poet discovers new powers Ignoring for a moment the well-established dangers of judging a book by its cover, it feels like you can divine a lot from the sleeve of Perfume Geniu …
Come-hither lions and sleazy owls: when Disney classics are difficult I remember, right at the start of the coronavirus lockdown, thinking that Disney+ would be a godsend. Finally, I thought, some quality. I could spend …
The Atom: A Love Affair review – changing reactions to nuclear power Vicki Lesley’s sprightly, inconclusive documentary tackles a perennially controversial subject: nuclear power and its contested ethical status. Like a …
Nicola Benedetti: Elgar Violin Concerto review – full-throttle, sinuous, subtle and electric The violin was Edward Elgar’s instrument, and when he was composing he thought as a string player: you can hear the idiomatic shaping of lines, the re …
'I barely breathed': Tilda Swinton, Emma Thompson, Steve McQueen and more on their most memorable moments at the movies ‘You didn’t sit where the tramps peed themselves’ Mike Leigh In my days as an impecunious young cineaste, there was the Tolmer cinema in Euston, the c …
Together in the dark: what we miss about going to the movies Cinema is a mass medium. And since we film-makers want to get as many people as possible to see our films, we try to find a common denominator. But we …
Miraa May's lockdown listening: 'I’m about to be a mum, but I won't lose my edge' Summary: I’m having a baby boy any day now, so I’m quarantining in London with my partner. Being a pregnant woman working in the music industry and not quite b …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The Distinguished Citizen If you’ve ever spent an extended amount of time in a small town, The Distinguished Citizen will prove to be not only an entertaining watch but a relat …
Scoob review – scrappy animated reboot is a ruff ride The relaunch of Scooby-Doo, a character born in the late 60s and sustaining a presence in the decades ever since, carries with it the potential for bo …
Witch 'n' Monk: Witch 'n' Monk review – Latin flautist and punk soprano make discordant, unearthly joy Summary: Witch ‘n’ Monk are a theatrical Anglo-Colombian duet featuring two very different musicians. Mauricio Velasierra plays a variety of flutes, while Heid …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 16, Beyoncé – Crazy in Love Crazy in Love rewrote pop history the moment it landed. Beyoncé’s 2003 smash hit is widely considered her debut solo single – eclipsing its largely fo …
Moby: All Visible Objects review – misjudged and out of touch Moby’s heydays bookended the 1990s. In 1991, the New York native smooshed together post-punk, 80s disco and the Twin Peaks score into Go, a quintessen …
Living-room disco: five of the best dance music mixes Summary: Bicep: Ambient Mix Hosted by the independent radio station NTS as part of its recent Remote Utopias festival, the Northern Irish dance duo take the BP …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Big Thief, Razorlight, Arca Big Thief Love in Mine For a group whose entire pitch is just “the Band, but in 2020”, Big Thief have an uncanny knack for poleaxing you in the tender …
Gurinder Chadha: 'I’ve written a whole new movie in lockdown' I’m in north London with my husband and 12-year-old twins. The twins rule the roost. It’s hard work, bloody home-schooling. The amount of printer ink …
Phil May, frontman with the Pretty Things, dies aged 75 Phil May, frontman of riotous band the Pretty Things who were acclaimed peers of David Bowie and the Rolling Stones, has died aged 75. He died in hosp …
Beatles photographer Astrid Kirchherr dies aged 81 Astrid Kirchherr, the photographer whose shots of the Beatles helped turn them into icons, has died aged 81. The Beatles writer Mark Lewisohn confirme …
The cinemas I grew up with keep shutting down. News that George Street may be next hit hard I remember receiving a stream of late night texts in 2014, from a Melbourne friend who was incensed that the Greater Union cinema on Russell Street wa …
Streaming: curate your own Cannes film festival Bring out your tiniest violins: in a normal year I’d be writing this column from the balmy French Riviera, with a glass of rosé at my side, amid the a …
Phil May of the Pretty Things: agent of chaos who fought the laws of pop Two years ago, I interviewed Phil May and Dick Taylor of the Pretty Things in the restaurant of a London hotel. Before the pair arrived, I sat chattin …
‘Women's stories are seen as niche’: Eliza Hittman on her timely new film Eliza Hittman does not make feelgood films. Instead, the Brooklyn-born director’s work is more likely to leave you with a strange sensation in the pit …
British Violin Sonatas Vol 3 review – Tasmin Little bows out in style After a career of three decades, the star violinist Tasmin Little may have had her farewell concert season thwarted – at least for now. Yet this final …
One to watch: Pinty Summary: For a while now, Peckham has been a hotbed of heads playing jazz-tinged house in converted pool rooms and straight-up jazz in the backrooms of boozers …
Women Make Film review – an epic trip through cinema's undiscovered world Perhaps it’s because of the way that time seems confoundingly elastic during lockdown, but the 14-hour running time of Mark Cousins’s epic journey thr …
The new queen bee: Rihanna is crowned Britain's wealthiest female musician Rihanna was a tiny child when she first walked in on her father smoking crack. The family struggled with poverty during her childhood in Barbados; her …
Fred Willard, much-loved star of Best in Show and This is Spinal Tap, dies aged 86 Fred Willard, an actor whose career was dotted with innumerable indelible cameos playing genial buffoons in unfortunate roles of authority, has died a …
Megan Washington, Tkay Maidza, Steve Smyth and more: Australian music for isolated times We’ve published a bunch of articles about how the coronavirus crisis has impacted the Australian arts industry – and musicians, being asked to play fo …
KSI: ‘Money gravitates towards me’ Summary: During the past couple of months, the internet star KSI has been prolific on YouTube, because what else has there been to do? He has asked subscribers …
The Orphanage – gritty Afghan drama laced with Bollywood magic The setting is Kabul, 1989, and in the opening shot of this lean Afghan drama, a boy wakes up, cracks his knuckles and pulls on a well-scuffed pair of …
Mark Lanegan: Straight Songs of Sorrow review – reflections on a misspent youth Mark Lanegan’s traumatic memoir, Sing Backwards and Weep, just published, recounts the Pacific Northwest singer’s deep dive into addiction, wrongdoing …
Sleaford Mods: All That Glue review – scattergun fury Unlike most of their chart peers, Sleaford Mods’ route to success has been a slow one, the Nottingham duo gathering momentum since their 2007 debut al …
Miranda July: 'There's so much anarchistic potential for self-invention right now' Miranda July, 46, is an acclaimed US film-maker, author and artist. Kajillionaire, her third film, and first for almost a decade, was a hit at Sundanc …
Don Vappie & Jazz Créole: The Blue Book of Storyville review – delicate rhythm and banjo An easy-going singer, virtuoso of the banjo and larger-than-life character, Don Vappie is as New Orleans as they come. His mixed-race Creole ancestors …
Phil May obituary As the singer and chief songwriter of the Pretty Things, Phil May, who has died aged 75 from complications following hip surgery after a cycling accid …
'They'd greet us with fire extinguishers!': the wild times of Blixa Bargeld ‘The fire got a bit out of control,” says Blixa Bargeld, recalling a gig his band played in 1986. As Einstürzende Neubauten, which means Collapsing Ne …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 15, Jerry Lee Lewis – Great Balls of Fire The revolutionary force of rock’n’roll’s first wave echoed down the years because it broke racial taboos, mixing black and white music, black and whit …
Lilly Wachowski rounds on Ivanka Trump and Elon Musk over Matrix tweets Film-maker Lilly Wachowski has responded to Elon Musk and Ivanka Trump after the pair bantered on social media using a phrase from the Wachowskis’ hit …
Johnny Depp libel claim can use Amber Heard PA evidence, says high court Evidence from a former employee of Amber Heard can form part of Johnny Depp’s case in his libel claim against the Sun newspaper over allegations he wa …
Michel Piccoli, renowned French acting veteran, dies aged 94 Michel Piccoli, the veteran French actor renowned for a string of celebrated performances for directors such as Luis Bunuel, Jean-Luc Godard and Louis …
Bob Marley: where to start in his back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Exodus (1977) Picking a top Bob Marley and the Wailers LP is tough. The revelatory arc his albums form over the two-plus decad …
Real-life Lord of the Flies story sparks film rights scramble The Guardian’s immensely popular article about a real-life Lord of the Flies-style shipwreck has sparked a scramble for screen adaptation rights among …
Michel Piccoli obituary For more than half a century, there seemed to be one constant in French cinema – the actor Michel Piccoli. With his death at the age of 94 something v …
How coronavirus has animated one section of the film industry Fans of US drama The Blacklist may have been surprised to find graphic animation interspersed among the live action scenes in the season finale on Fri …
'Misery gives us strength': Soolking, the rap voice of young Algeria Thirty-year-old Algerian rapper Soolking was just hitting his stride before the world was put on lockdown. His commercially appealing blend of pop, re …
Bad Bunny: does a straight man deserve to be called a 'queer icon'? In 2020, when definitions of sexuality and gender are undergoing major changes, can a straight man be a queer icon? Yes, according to a glowing cover …
Bouncing bassoons and yowling cats: can retro kids' films compete with Sonic? It has been roughly one billion years since the schools closed. Your strict rules about screen-time limits have long since melted away to nothing, and …
Peter Gallagher: 'One of the most toxic things in the world is success' The director Robert Altman used to tell Peter Gallagher, the suave star of his 1992 movie The Player: “Gallagher, you’re so good-looking it makes me s …
Clicked back to life: how Netflix is reviving forgotten film flops News last week that Woody Allen’s latest, the Amazon-disowned A Rainy Day in New York, was the world’s number one film at the box office spread fast, …
Christopher Eccleston: 'I don't watch TV – it's too hard to suspend disbelief' I’m self-isolating alone, but, for five nights a fortnight, I have my children, Albert, eight, and Esme, six, to stay. We just watched a Japanese anim …
I've never seen ... Notting Hill As someone who’s taken it upon himself to be knowledgable about film, I’ve long been aware that Richard Curtis occupies a high-ranking throne on romco …
Oscars 2021 likely to be postponed – report The 2021 Oscar ceremony is likely to be delayed due to the coronavirus pandemic, according to a report in the film industry magazine Variety. Citing u …
Take Me Somewhere Nice review – quirky arthouse road movie The title, at once aimless and coyly, almost whimsically seductive, gives a partial sense of this film’s mood. It’s an elegantly made road movie in a …
The Painter and the Thief: behind the year's most moving documentary Barbora Kysilkova, a Czech painter, had just recently moved to Oslo when she received a distressing phone call from a gallerist. Two men had finagled …
The Final Wish review – curse of the cliche puts paid to haunted-vase tale The Final Wish could be the last straw. It’s another example of dumb horror: derivative, factory-product, unscary movie-making that jumbles up a bunch …
Gabriel Bacquier obituary Summary: One of the finest French baritones of the second half of the 20th century, Gabriel Bacquier has died aged 95. Though by no means confined to the Frenc …
Edge of Extinction review – a gruelling fight to survive … and stay awake Summary: This postapocalyptic survivalist thriller, set in rural Britain, is both violent and depressing, with some iffy line-readings, weird script moments an …
Justice League: Zack Snyder's cut to be released after fan campaign Zack Snyder has revealed that the “Snyder cut” of 2017’s critically loathed DC adventure Justice League will finally see the light of day. The directo …
John Malkovich: 'I had a lot of violence growing up, but so what?' You could spend a lifetime preparing to interview John Malkovich. For starters, there are his films, about 90 of them – mainstream, indie, European ar …
The Empire Strikes Back at 40: did the Star Wars saga peak too early? When The Empire Strikes Back was released 40 years ago, it was simply the sequel to Star Wars. It was not yet Star Wars: Episode V – The Empire Strike …
The County review – a fierce fight for justice in the Icelandic highlands The spirit of Elia Kazan lives on in this tough community drama from Icelandic film-maker Grímur Hákonarson, who won golden plaudits for his 2015 pict …
I've never seen … Sleepless in Seattle Summary: I love a romcom. Place me in front of a Richard Curtis film for the 100th time and I am more than happy. Teach me how to Forget Sarah Marshall, Lose a …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 12, Sinéad O'Connor – Nothing Compares 2 U It’s been 30 years and 142 days since Sinéad O’Connor scaled the charts with Nothing Compares 2 U, her only Top 10 hit. It wasn’t the only anomalous t …
The Flavour of Green Tea Over Rice review – Ozu's bittersweet triumph The flavour is that of ochazuke, green tea poured over rice: it’s a classic, simple, unassuming taste that, for the married couple in Yasujiro Ozu’s d …
The Dalai Lama: Scientist review – a mildly enlightening soft-focus insight If you’re looking for a definitive Dalai Lama documentary, this narrow-focus film about his lifelong passion for science probably won’t cut it. Direct …
Lana Del Rey hits back at critics who say she 'glamorises abuse' Summary: Lana Del Rey has hit out at the accusations that she “glamorises abuse” that have trailed her throughout her decade-long career. In a lengthy text pos …
I, Pastafari review – inside the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster Representing what would be a solid second part of a double bill of docs about wacky religions to follow (the better, funnier) Hail, Satan?, Oregon-bas …
Franck: Le Chasseur Maudit; Psyché; Les Éolides review – vivid symphonic poems to rekindle a reputation Though he was born in Belgium, César Franck was based in Paris for almost all of his adult life. His pupils included Duparc, Chausson and d’Indy, whil …
'They're not all negative!': 20 film-makers (and the Grim Reaper) respond to Brexit Summary: A woman repeatedly punches David Cameron in the head, or at least an effigy of him. In slow motion, its smiling features distort under her blows. Else …
Fifteen years on, how does Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith stand up? If there has ever been a movie with greater pre-release fanboy goodwill than Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith enjoyed, it is hard to remem …
Justice for directors! The $20m 'Snyder cut' should only be the start For what feels like ages, comic-book fans have been clamouring for the “Snyder cut” of Justice League: the version of the 2017 film intended to be rel …
Fred Willard obituary The American comedy actor Fred Willard, who has died aged 86, never took top billing on screen, but he found his niche as a scene-stealer in the mocku …
‘Spotify's tip jar is offensive to artists and consumers’: stars on pop’s future after coronavirus Summary: Like many other aspects of life, the music industry has been changed, possibly permanently, by the coronavirus pandemic. There have been predictions o …
I've never seen … The Searchers When people ask me what kind of films I like, I never know what to say. I like everything! Total trash, high art, comedy, horror, British realism, Cze …
Body Cam review – Mary J Blige cop horror is halfway haunting In last October’s well-intentioned yet hackneyed action drama Black and Blue, Naomie Harris played a cop caught between allegiance to the force and to …
Jake Blount: Spider Tales review - instant classic reinstates folk's black, queer roots Jake Blount is a brilliant banjoist, fiddle player and singer based in Rhode Island in the US, his fingering thrilling and pacy, his voice charismatic …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The President's Barber One of the oddest aspects of this year’s awards season – which happened approximately four thousand years ago – was that Parasite swept the board in a …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 11, The Beach Boys – Good Vibrations Few pop songs are as revered for their technical prowess as this post-Pet Sounds October 1966 release by the Beach Boys. With lyrics by Mike Love and …
'They're behaving as capitalists': the film inspired by Iceland's farming stranglehold ‘The majority of people there support the co-operative, and if they found out we were criticising it, there might have been more complications.” Icela …
Carly Rae Jepsen's lockdown listening: 'My fridge caught on fire!' I’m in sunny Los Angeles, quarantined solo with my cat. It’s been intense for a lot of different reasons. My fridge caught on fire. I didn’t know frid …
Mory Kanté: Guinean musician dies aged 70 from chronic health problems The Guinean musician Mory Kanté has died aged 70. His son Balla Kanté told the AFP news agency that his death was the result of untreated chronic heal …
Hollywood studio behind 12 Years a Slave wins rights for 'real life Lord of the Flies' The Hollywood studio behind 12 Years a Slave and The Revenant has won the battle for film rights to the story of the six Tongan teenagers stranded for …
Paschal Allen obituary My friend Paschal Allen, who has died aged 87 from Covid-19, was an opera singer who spent 15 years at the Royal Opera House, toured extensively acros …
The Shining at 40: will we ever fully understand what it all means? Eight years ago, the Rodney Ascher documentary Room 237 reignited discussion over Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining by surveying a range of different fan …
Cyrillus Kreek: The Suspended Harp of Babel review – music of another place and time The 15-strong Estonian choir Vox Clamantis, conspicuously full-toned and subtly expressive, is perhaps best known for singing music by their fellow co …
One to watch: Tiana Major9 Summary: Tiana Major9 has a voice that is potent in its rich, unfaltering nature. Born and raised in Newham, east London, in a Jamaican household, she grew up …
The 1975: Notes on a Conditional Form review – an uncertain record for uncertain times The 1975’s Notes on a Conditional Form is an album that thanks you not to classify it. Long delayed, running at roughly 80 minutes and featuring cameo …
Sam Neill: ‘I should be at Pinewood. The Jurassic World III sets are there waiting’ Sam Neill, star of Jurassic Park, The Piano and Peaky Blinders, is one of the best-known screen faces of the last 30 years. Yet the actor finds the id …
Take Me Somewhere Nice review – a sultry Bosnian road trip Dutch teenager Alma (Sara Luna Zorić) is having the holiday from hell. Her cousin Emir (Ernad Prnjavorać) won’t drive her to see her dying dad, she ca …
Steve Earle and the Dukes: Ghosts of West Virginia review – testimony to a coal-mining tragedy A longstanding supporter of green and leftwing causes, Steve Earle describes his 20th studio album as “a record that speaks to and for people who didn …
From Justin Bieber to Haim: how seven top artists made video clips in lockdown New Zealand band the Beths are getting ready to release their second album in June. It’s kind of a weird time to do it. “It’s pretty strange, it feels …
Powderfinger One Night Lonely review – first show in a decade a poignant reminder of what we've lost There were many poignant moments watching Powderfinger streaming their first show in a decade on Saturday night, but the biggest one was seeing bassis …
Lockdown playlists for every mood, part one: chosen by Jarvis Cocker, Haim and Lianne La Havas Jarvis Cocker’s uplifting playlist … for raising the spirits Cocker and his partner, Kim, have been keeping their spirits up during lockdown by doing …
KSI: Dissimulation review – a pugnacious debut Dissimulation is the pugnacious solo debut LP of UK rapper KSI. Straight outta Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, Olajide Olatunji first found renown as a Yo …
Igor Levit: 'These concerts were life-saving for me' The Russian-born, German-based superstar pianist Igor Levit, 33, is renowned for the fearlessness and intensity of his playing, and for his zest for t …
Lockdown playlists for every mood, part two: chosen by Norah Jones, Joe Talbot and Flohio Norah Jones’s peaceful playlist … for a calm start to the day In lockdown in New York, Norah Jones and her husband, Pete, have started a new musical t …
'Like a tap being turned off': music magazines fight for survival in UK As the nation locked down in March, the staff of Loud and Quiet magazine knew they were in trouble. No gigs or festivals for the foreseeable future di …
Tim Burgess: I Love the New Sky review – unabashedly uplifting Summary: A chameleon of the times, Charlatans frontman Tim Burgess has manoeuvred smooth transitions from baggy psychedelicist to pugnacious belter of Britpop …
Lockdown playlists for every mood, part three: chosen by Bat for Lashes, Neil Tennant, Jason Williamson and Mike Skinner Bat for Lashes’s optimistic playlist … for bringing positive vibes At her home of three years in Los Angeles, Natasha Khan and her boyfriend are havin …
Sydney Opera House's livestreamed concert series could be a game-changer for local bands Vivid festival was due to light up Sydney on Friday but instead the city is dark and silent bar a few night-joggers ploughing the streets. There’s a s …
Courtney Love in Liverpool: the Scousers who taught the grunge icon how to rock If you were in Liverpool in 1982 and had a habit of wandering down Mathew Street, perhaps on your way to Probe record store, you are likely to have se …
My favourite film aged 12: Diva For this 12-year-old, Paris was a dream city where a dream me might idle days away at pavement cafes, talking about art that was very probably profoun …
From Germany to Detroit and back: how Kraftwerk forged an industrial exchange When the death of Kraftwerk co-founder Florian Schneider was announced last week, the loudest tributes came from the electronic music community. Kraft …
Reality bites: are virtual actors about to put Hollywood's humans out of work? With A-listers such as Scarlett Johansson, Will Smith and Steven Spielberg on its books, Creative Artists Agency (CAA) is a fixture of the Hollywood e …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 10, Marvin Gaye – I Heard It Through the Grapevine It can be hard to grasp the depth and breadth of Marvin Gaye’s career. He seems to have lived one of those kaleidoscopic lives that could only have oc …
I've never seen … Jaws Jaws is not a film about a shark. I knew this before I watched it because, every few months for the best part of two decades, Mark Kermode has reminde …
Sonic Youth: where to start in their back catalogue The album to start with Daydream Nation (1988) One of indie rock’s truly sacred texts, Daydream Nation is both a gripping synthesis of the punk, colle …
How We Made: Airplane! Summary: David and Jerry Zucker, directors (with Jim Abrahams) We used to seek out movies that were mind-numbingly serious and dub them with our own voices. La …
House music:  classical critics' watching and listening picks My corona-listening is a mix of random v planned. Switching on BBC Radio 3, but missing the beginning of a piece, is one kind of random. The fabulous …
Mory Kanté obituary Mory Kanté, who has died aged 70 from untreated health problems, was a singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist and one of west Africa’s most versati …
Jimmy Cobb, drummer on Miles Davis's Kind of Blue, dies aged 91 Jimmy Cobb, the jazz drummer and last surviving player on Miles Davis’s seminal 1959 album Kind of Blue has died from lung cancer at age 91. Cobb was …
Michael Moore film Planet of the Humans removed from YouTube YouTube has taken down the controversial Michael Moore-produced documentary Planet of the Humans in response to a copyright infringement claim by a Br …
'I will kill you if you give this song to anyone but me': how Peggy Lee was perfect for Is That All There Is? In September 1968, songwriting titans Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller were on the hunt for a singer for their curious new composition Is That All There …
Britt Ekland: 'I was put through emotional and psychological warfare' Two days after their first date – which was also their first meeting – the comedian Peter Sellers gave Britt Ekland a dachshund puppy called Pepper. E …
Babette's Feast: Julian Baggini savours the ultimate lockdown movie At a time when basic grocery shopping is a military operation and many people’s incomes have been cut, an invitation to watch others eat a seven-cours …
Bobby Digital: Jamaican reggae producer dies aged 59 Renowned Jamaican record producer Robert “Bobby Digital” Dixon died in a Kingston hospital on 21 May, aged 59. The cause of death was kidney disease. …
Corona-sploitation: is it too soon for Hollywood to make Covid-19 movies? Summary: Back in the heady days of 2006, a minor controversy broke out upon the release of United 93, a film recreating the events of 9/11 with a documentary-s …
'People continue to turn a blind eye': behind a shocking film about music industry abuse In mid-December 2017, two months after reporting on Harvey Weinstein triggered what is now known as the #MeToo movement, Drew Dixon bought a copy of t …
David Bowie, Adele and Beyoncé: BBC unveils Glastonbury coverage The final weekend of June should have seen 200,000 revellers descend on Somerset for the 50th anniversary of the Glastonbury festival. With the event …
Sydney film festival's isolation edition: from climate devastation to killer jellyfish Summary: Another year, another vibrant Sydney film festival program, full of exciting titles procured from around the world, which will screen at various cinem …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 8, The Prodigy – Firestarter It starts with a riff: not a distorted guitar but a contorted squeal from a twisted fairground. It’s a riff nonetheless, the instantly sticky sign of …
Claes Bang: 'I've been watching a great Danish show … what was it called?' I’m with my wife in the countryside, just north of Copenhagen. It’s not been as harsh here in Denmark. Everything is practically back to normal. Kids …
House of horrors: how cinema turned a safe space into a trap In Alfred Hitchcock’s Rear Window, that classic of locked-down cinema, the photographer LB Jefferies (played by James Stewart) gazes out at his doll’s …
Add some township jive! How London's jazz scene set itself apart Although its live scene is currently on pause, jazz has been thriving throughout London, with names such as Shabaka Hutchings, Nubya Garcia and Binker …
Olla review – mail-order bride ruffles feathers in French suburbia This half-hour short film by Ariane Labed is a sparkily absurdist declaration of female independence that bucks against male fantasy. Romanna Lobach, …
Krabi, 2562 review – mystery and mysticism in the Thai tropics It is the Buddhist year 2562 (or 2019 in the Gregorian calendar), and this probing, experimental and collaborative film by Ben Rivers and Anocha Suwic …
Will the Labyrinth sequel work without David Bowie and Jim Henson? Name: Labyrinth 2. Age: It has been in the works for a few years, but a new director has just been announced. Appearance: That Labyrinth sequel you ha …
My favourite film aged 12: Ghost When you’re 12 the main thing you want to be is 13. You’re desperate to be older. Desperate to grow up. This feeling is particularly acute when you ha …
Around the World When You Were My Age review – going nowhere fast I couldn’t make friends with this film, an indulgent, self-conscious essay-memoir movie from director Aya Koretzky. It is about her Japanese father Ji …
Spike Island at 30: the Stone Roses gig was scary, shambolic – and pure bliss History tells me that the Stone Roses at Spike Island was, in musical terms, awful: the band seemed bored, the sound was weak. Here were 27,000 people …
The Proms to go ahead this summer, but 'not as we know them' There will be Prom concerts this summer but not as we know them and, given there may well be no live audiences and no full orchestras, they are the gr …
The Proms needs its audience just as we need the Proms I first went to a Proms concert as a teenager. Just as one does still today, I joined the queue that snakes around the outside of the Albert Hall, bou …
Intuition review – cliches run wild in Argentinian Netflix thriller The Argentinian thriller Intuition begins where most thrillers end. Renegade detective Francisco Juanez (Joaquín Furriel) is dragging his skeptical co …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 7, The Human League – Don't You Want Me Sometimes you can’t quite trust artists to tell the truth about their best work. Speaking to Smash Hits around the time of Don’t You Want Me’s release …
Screened Out review – screentime doc knows how to press your buttons With this enthusiastic, info-taining documentary Jon Hyatt runs the risk of stating the bleeding obvious by elaborating on facts everyone is already a …
Ill-advised car journeys on film – ranked! 13. Sonic the Hedgehog (2020) The internet tells us that Sonic the Hedgehog can run at 362mph. In the film Sonic the Hedgehog, the eponymous hero has …
'You lot can’t rattle me': John Boyega defends explicit anti-racism posts in wake of George Floyd death John Boyega has been praised for a series of uncompromising social media posts speaking out about racism in the wake of the killing of George Floyd by …
Strauss: Die Frau ohne Schatten review – outstanding account of a demanding, dramatic masterpiece Die Frau ohne Schatten, The Woman Without a Shadow, may be the piece that marks out the real Richard Strauss fans from the mere admirers. To fully pai …
Pills, mills and bellyaches: how Blackburn out-partied Manchester In 1987, Nigel Gilmartin was working as a mobile DJ in Blackburn: weddings, engagements and birthdays at community halls; the shirt-and-tie scene at w …
Irm Hermann, star of 20 Fassbinder films, dies aged 77 Irm Hermann, one of Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s closest collaborators, has died in Berlin aged 77 following what her agent called a “short, serious ill …
Searching for Superman: why Henry Cavill deserves another chance as the Man of Steel Henry Cavill must sometimes wonder if his life might have turned out a little easier were it not for a certain illustrious forerunner in the role of S …
Andy Gill: Gang of Four to release guitarist's final recordings The influential post-punk band Gang of Four are to release the final recordings featuring the group’s influential guitarist and songwriter Andy Gill, …
Jimmy Cobb obituary There are sublime moments in music that only the cognoscenti notice, plenty that millions love, and some that many sense without quite knowing why. Ki …
'Do I really care?' Woody Allen comes out fighting When Woody Allen was 20, the writer Danny Simon taught him a few rules about comedy, the most important of which was this: always trust your own judgm …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Terror Firmer Summary: A film about a series of hilariously grotesque murders on a B-movie film set certainly isn’t going to be to everyone’s taste. But if you’ve ever enjoy …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 6, Michael Jackson – Billie Jean Billie Jean is not cancelled. Whatever personal arrangement you may have come to regarding the life and music of Michael Jackson, the culture at large …
Whit Dickey Trio: Expanding Light review – pin-sharp free jazz finds new heat Summary: A post-Coltrane coterie of American free jazz players, including the late sax radical David S Ware and eclectic composer/bassist William Parker, have …
Mike Wallace Is Here review – rose-tinted chronicle of a journalistic giant Mike Wallace was the TV news reporter who became a household name in the US in the 60s as a correspondent with the CBS 60 Minutes programme, pioneerin …
Sophie Ellis-Bextor's lockdown listening: 'A child could understand it – stay at home' Summary: Time alone has been in short supply. In the mornings, when I get up with Mickey, my youngest, we’ve been watching Grayson Perry’s Art Club and Celebri …
Nicolas Winding Refn: 'If Pence became president, this is what America might look like' I’ve been asked to report on what I’ve been watching during quarantine. Mostly, it’s the news – who can top that these days – but when I want to savou …
Westerman: ‘Music is an incredibly helpful thing to have in difficult times’ The last cliche anyone needs to hear more of now is how the music that’s coming out is “perfect for these unprecedented times”. But what we do need ar …
Lady Gaga: Chromatica review – Gaga rediscovers the riot on her most personal album A criticism often levelled at Lady Gaga is that the fantastical imagery she constructs around her albums eclipses the music itself. But it’s a sliding …
Quentin Tarantino: The Social Network is 'hands down' the best film of 2010s Quentin Tarantino has named David Fincher’s drama about the creation of Facebook, The Social Network, as the best film of the past decade. Speaking to …
Kate Miller-Heidke, Cub Sport, Alice Skye and more: Australian music for isolated times Summary: We’ve published a bunch of articles about how the coronavirus crisis has impacted the Australian arts industry – and musicians, being asked to play fo …
Taylor Swift accuses Trump of 'stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism' Taylor Swift has accused Donald Trump of “stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism” after tweets sent by the president appeared to threaten vio …
Streaming: the best home invasion films Not many good things have happened so far in 2020, but Parasite ruling the Oscars in February ranks high among them. It took 92 years for the Academy …
Rose Byrne: ‘You understand why feminists are furious – we’re still talking about this?’ A few days before New York locked down and Broadway closed indefinitely, Rose Byrne was on stage in Brooklyn, doing Medea. It was a sold-out run, co-s …
Elgar & Beach: Piano Quintets review – the Takács and Garrick Ohlsson in a passionate embrace “Wood magic, so elusive and delicate,” was Lady Elgar’s description of her husband’s new composition for piano and string quartet, written in West Sus …
Coriky: Coriky review – keeping it hardcore It’s difficult to overstate the significance of Fugazi. An American art-rock institution, they provided a slinky, authoritative moral racket from the …
One to watch: Coach Party Countless islands make up the United Kingdom, and the Isle of Wight might be the most misunderstood of them all. It’s never just been home to teenager …
Only the Animals – slippery, satisfying French-African mystery This slippery tease of a movie opens with a shot of a man weaving through the traffic on a bike in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, with a goat slung around his …
Igor Levit to play 20-hour Eric Satie piece as 'silent scream' The German-Russian pianist Igor Levit will perform a rarely played, 20-hour Eric Satie composition to a global audience on Saturday to highlight the p …
The High Note review – a pleasant diversion Director Nisha Ganatra follows the Emma Thompson-starring comedy Late Night with another film that takes as its jumping-off point the relationship bet …
The Batman among movies given go-ahead for restart of UK filming Producers of Hollywood blockbusters including The Batman and the next Fantastic Beasts film have been given the go-ahead to restart filming after the …
Diplo: Presents Thomas Wesley Chapter One: Snake Oil review – country cash-in Given that last year’s biggest song (by whatever metric you care to choose) was Lil Nas X‘s country-rap breakout track Old Town Road, it’s perhaps not …
Yesterday credits row shows trouble's never far away in film writing As a premise, it is surprisingly simple: a young musician who is the only person in the world to know the Beatles’ back catalogue forges a successful …
John Gregory obituary My brother, John Gregory, who has died aged 95, was an award-winning musician, composer and arranger. He wrote and arranged music for 27 films, includ …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Kumbalangi Nights One of 2019’s biggest Malayalam hits, Kumbalangi Nights provides a superior example of one of those lay-of-the-land movies that troubles to build a wo …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s, No 5: Dead or Alive – You Spin Me Round (Like a Record) Summary: The UK production trio Stock Aitken Waterman (SAW) dubbed their studio the Hit Factory, and with good reason. Not only did it generate hits – Never Go …
Move over, R-Patz: how Timothée Chalamet became the movie star of his generation Those seeking explanations as to how Woody Allen’s A Rainy Day in New York topped the global box office a few weeks ago, despite two years of delays, …
Billie Eilish, Jay-Z and more voice solidarity with George Floyd protesters Stars from across the pop music spectrum, including Billie Eilish, Adele, Jay-Z, Ariana Grande and more have used their sizeable platforms to support …
Spike Lee releases short film as part of George Floyd protests Spike Lee has released a short film as protests against the death of George Floyd continue, which equates Floyd’s treatment at the hands of police wit …
I've never seen … Gandhi Summary: Which film has the most extras? As a child, Richard Attenborough’s Gandhi was just the answer to a trivia question. Growing up in India in the 90s and …
Bob Dylan: where to start in his back catalogue Summary: The album to start with The Times They Are A-Changin’ (1964) The cover told the story. After the portrait of the unformed boy, fresh in from Minnesota …
The government's new film production guidelines risk massive damage to UK industry The news that Covid-19 safety guidance has been approved for the UK’s film and television industry is very welcome. But it is by no means the end of t …
Landmark 20th Century Fox building in London facing new threat Twentieth Century Fox’s former HQ faces the threat of imminent demolition after developers submitted a new set of plans, it has been revealed. Situate …
#TheShowMustBePaused: music industry plans day of silence for George Floyd On Tuesday, the music industry will observe a “blackout day” in the wake of George Floyd’s death and the protests raging across the country. The demon …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 4, Donna Summer – I Feel Love In 1975, a stellar team based in Germany laid the groundwork for a musical revolution, the aftershock of which is still being felt today. American sin …
Lennie Niehaus, longtime Clint Eastwood composer, dies aged 90 Summary: Lennie Niehaus, who as Clint Eastwood’s favoured composer created the scores to Unforgiven and 12 more of his films, has died aged 90. He died at his …
David Baddiel: ‘Kids have a better sense of humour than they used to' Like many, I began lockdown by bingeing on Tiger King, which remains one of the most extraordinary pieces of TV I’ve ever seen – although I’ve become …
George Clooney on George Floyd killing: racism is America's pandemic George Clooney has called for a “systemic change” of law enforcement, criminal justice and political leadership in the US, in an essay reacting to the …
'No downside': Johnny Marr, Best Coast and Jason Isbell on how sobriety improves music My sobriety began with a jump, falling into murky water. That’s not a metaphor: swimming in the middle of nowhere in my native South Africa in 2012, I …
Lucy Crowe/Anna Tilbrook review – bittersweet beauty Marking the 20th anniversary of their first concert together, Lucy Crowe and Anna Tilbrook gave the opening song recital in the Wigmore Hall/Radio 3 l …
Run the Jewels: ‘I want the oppressors to know they haven’t created complete hopelessness’ Run the Jewels have enjoyed one of the more improbable rises to fame in recent hip-hop history. Two figures nearing 40, from the genre’s margins – Kil …
Jack Colwell: Swandream review – theatrical, raw songs packed with pain and soaring survival A friend of mine instinctively reacts to dramatic pop songs – the type of thing with vocal and musical flourishes that feel theatrical; big swings in …
My favourite film aged 12: The Sixth Sense I turned 12 in 1999. Some film buffs like to say the year was one of the greatest in cinema’s history, spawning storied releases such as Fight Club, E …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 3, The Beatles – She Loves You To hear She Loves You bursting out of a radio in the last week of August 1963 was to recognise a shout of triumph. Everything the Beatles had promised …
William Shatner: 'I'm in a ferment of creativity' I live with my wife in Los Angeles overlooking the San Fernando Valley. I can see the sunrise one way, sunset the other. My wife is talented in many w …
Lizzo and Lil Nas X criticise Blackout Tuesday for obscuring protests Lizzo and Lil Nas X have condemned a music industry-sponsored social media movement to suspend business activities in support of global protests spark …
MS Slavic 7 review – passionless portrait of a poetic affair The high-mindedness, unworldliness and pure strangeness of this inert docu-fiction essay give it some interest – but frankly not much. Director Sofia …
Dating Amber review – gay teenagers' pretend love fails to blossom David Freyne’s eager-to-please coming-of-age movie set in the 90s has the sort of high concept that could well have been greenlit in the 90s, though f …
'It was heartbreaking': the day Bob Marley played Crystal Palace What turned out to be the last Garden Party in Crystal Palace, on 7 June 1980, had already been pretty memorable. Joe Jackson was booed off stage afte …
Rosemarie Wright obituary My former teacher Rosemarie Wright, who has died aged 88, was a pianist of rare poetry and refinement. Her first international successes came in Vienn …
Delroy Lindo: 'British racism is as violent and virulent as America's' Summary: Delroy Lindo has waited 25 years to work with Spike Lee again and Da 5 Bloods gives him one of the best roles of his career. But when he first read th …
Banana Split review – muddled high-school romcom Here’s a film that has been dug out from near the back of the freezer cabinet – something from 2018. It’s a teen female-friendship, coming-of-ager fro …
Nirvana: Krist Novoselic praises Trump's 'strong and direct' protest speech Former Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic has praised Donald Trump for the “law and order” speech he gave on 1 June in response to protests sparked by th …
Sean Shibe review – a nonchalant virtuoso and boundary breaker Summary: At 28, guitarist Sean Shibe may be one of the youngest of this month’s Wigmore Hall recitalists, but the calm authority with which he delivered this l …
Mark Ricaldone obituary “Ascoltatrici ed ascoltatori gentili” or “Dear listeners”: these are the opening words of the Italian composer Pietro Mascagni in the spoken introduct …
Hooking Up review – sex addict on the road to nowhere A sex addict re-enacts every one of her 169 conquests on a road trip across America with a man she’s only just met – he’s got testicular cancer – in t …
Sia, Washington, Tkay Maidza and more: Australia's best new music for June Summary: Bad//Dreems – Desert Television For fans of: the Go-Betweens, Midnight Oil, Divinyls There’s an uneasy, isolated air to the music of Bad//Dreems, info …
Cannes selects lineup for 2020 edition after 'physical' festival shelved Wes Anderson, Kate Winslet and Steve McQueen are among the big names whose films have received the stamp of approval from the prestigious Cannes film …
Phantom Cannes lineup a defiant statement of survival for festival that lives in the imagination Summary: This was the phantom announcement of the phantom Cannes. A cancelled Christmas when all we got in our stockings was a list of the presents we’re not g …
Trick or Treat review – gangsters, sushi and Blackpool hallucinations In this Blackpool-set thriller, semi-retired wide boy Greg (Craig Kelly) is feeling bored and stifled by the routine of fatherhood with an infant daug …
Spelling the Dream review – slight but charming Netflix documentary It’s virtually impossible to group the words spelling, bee and documentary together without instantly recalling 2003’s Oscar-nominated Spellbound, a w …
A Rainy Day in New York review – Woody Allen romance is a washout So it goes on, the eerie productivity of Woody Allen, who outlived his greatness, and might yet outlive his notoriety. However, there are, for the tim …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 2, The Specials – Ghost Town In early 1981, the Specials were both at the top of their game and in their death throes. They had enjoyed a dizzying, agenda-setting rise to fame. Se …
John Boyega's rousing Black Lives Matter speech wins praise and support John Boyega, the actor who followed up last week’s blistering attack on social media racism with a powerful speech at a Black Lives Matter rally in Lo …
Guest of Honour review – tangled melodrama of guilt and shame David Thewlis stars here, and it is only the absolute conviction of his performance that saves this from being an utter misfire – a misfire of the sor …
'I ain’t waiting': John Boyega shows movie stars what political engagement looks like Summary: Already, the sneery backlash has begun – as so much Trumpism is founded on that keynote of faux-underdog self-pity in the face of supposedly all-power …
Jessie Ware: What's Your Pleasure? review – dancefloor diva back where she belongs The comfort zone has a bad reputation. No artist wants to be seen to be creatively complacent, or uncompetitive, a state of affairs that’s much more a …
Days of the Bagnold Summer review –  sweet tale of a metalhead and his mum Here’s a movie that tells us that the days of summer, like the boys of summer in Don Henley’s song, are going to get outlived by the love they inspire …
Tom Jones's 20 greatest songs – ranked! 20. The Hitter (2008) Tom Jones’s 2008 album 24 Hours was a mixed bag, with cheery efforts to recapture his swinging mojo (If He Should Ever Leave You …
Daugherty: This Land Sings review – exuberant polyglot Woody Guthrie celebration Michael Daugherty’s music has always embraced the full, polyglot spectrum of American culture. He’s composed a Metropolis Symphony after the Superman …
The Sweet bassist Steve Priest dies aged 72 Steve Priest, bassist and vocalist with glam rock band the Sweet, has died age 72. His bandmates confirmed the news, sharing a statement from the fami …
Live music returns to Royal Opera House for an online audience The Royal Opera House is to host its first live event since closing its doors to the public more than 11 weeks ago. The first concert in a series of t …
Wiley on his final album: 'I need to not let grime die on the way out' While I was waiting for Wiley to answer the phone for our interview, he was busily tweeting about the greatness of The Wire (“people will be tryna cop …
Siti Muharam: Siti of Unguja review – scion of taarab pioneer redefines it The Indian Ocean archipelago of Zanzibar has historically been a meeting place of cultures, from the Indian spice trade to the east African slave trad …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The Invitation The Invitation starts and ends with death. Will and Kira, a couple played by Logan Marshall-Green and Emayatzy Corinealdi, are driving to a dinner par …
From Platoon to Winter Soldier: 10 of the best Vietnam war films Apocalypse Now Spike Lee’s Da 5 Bloods, which is released on Netflix on 12 June, is the newest entry in cinema’s decades-long fascination with the tra …
Neil Tennant on West End Girls: 'It's about sex and escape. It's paranoid' Summary: We named West End Girls the greatest ever UK No 1. Did we get it right? Well, I would have chosen Good Vibrations. It’s obviously intensely subjective …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: 100-1 As the coronavirus lockdown continues, the Guardian’s music desk thought you might be in need of a distraction – something to send you down memory lan …
The 100 greatest UK No 1 singles: what did we miss? After our six-week countdown – and we realise that was long enough for entire civilisations to shift on their foundations – we’ve completed our list o …
The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 1, Pet Shop Boys – West End Girls West End Girls is a lens on to a glamorous demimonde. Primped young women and hungry young men meet in a corner of London that is starting to gentrify …
Kate NV's lockdown listening: 'I'm definitely a major key person!' I’ve spent the whole lockdown at home in Moscow. It’s funny, I’d actually planned to spend March and April at home, writing new music – that was the p …
Echo in the Canyon review – hopelessly lazy LA rock doc This documentary about the folk-rock scene in mid-60s Laurel Canyon, Los Angeles, centres on an all-star tribute show, and would have made a neat free …
Cate Blanchett suffers chainsaw accident on lockdown in East Sussex Cate Blanchett has sustained a cut to the head following a chainsaw accident at her home in East Sussex. The Oscar-winning actor, who relocated from S …
Ambush: Ask My Brother review – fierce dispatch from a hostile state In 2017, Ambush’s cousin Nuno Cardoso died in police custody. With protesters around the world mobilising in solidarity with the US Black Lives Matter …
‘It's not our fault!’ Are the Coronas the unluckiest band of 2020? If you grew up in the 70s named Damien, run any of the country’s Isis healing crystal shops or hail from the proud and ancient clan McBoatface, you’ll …
Pavel Kolesnikov and Samson Tsoy review – piano duo bring electrifying intimacy Most musicians with regular duet partners will have been feeling the wrench of separation during lockdown, but not the pianists Pavel Kolesnikov and S …
Ball Park Music, Alex the Astronaut, Gordi and more: Australian music for isolated times We’ve published a bunch of articles about how the coronavirus crisis has impacted the Australian arts industry – and musicians have been hit harder th …
Streaming: the best Hollywood golden age classics now on iPlayer Many a friend and family member has told me they’re watching more classic cinema than usual in lockdown, and not just because they’ve binged every bit …
Actor Monica Dolan: Losing my brother to Covid-19 is part of a global story Two years ago, in a neat suburban house on a cul-de-sac in Bromley, where all furniture was floral, and every wall painted magnolia, I watched Monica …
Classical home listening: Herbert Howells, Sean Shibe's Bach and Royal Opera's Il trittico • Herbert Howells’s Missa Sabrinensis, written for the Worcester Three Choirs festival in 1954 and dedicated to the Severn – a river associated both w …
One to watch: BenjiFlow When BenjiFlow was a youngster in Edmonton, London, he aspired to be a grime MC – but you wouldn’t know it from how smoothly he sings, or how omnivoro …
Why today’s musicians should follow classical greats ... and improvise Bach, Mozart and Beethoven all thrilled audiences with their spontaneous improvisations. But today’s classical pianists have lost the art, according t …
A Rainy Day in New York review – misogyny bathed in nostalgia In Woody Allen’s latest offering, Gen Z heart-throb Timothée Chalamet plays a character named Gatsby Welles. This is only the film’s first red flag. T …
GoGo Penguin: GoGo Penguin review – adrenaline rush Summary: At times on this fourth album from the Manchester trio you want to ask: “What’s the rush?” A pell-mell, pedal-to-the-floor approach is, of course, one …
Days of the Bagnold Summer review – bittersweet tale of family strife Lockdown has done strange things to families. Some have been stretched to breaking point by lengthy periods of communal incarceration; others have bee …
Brigid Mae Power: Head Above the Water review – quotidian magic On her third album, Irish folk singer Brigid Mae Power sees no disconnect between ancient and modern. Neither does her haunting voice, an instrument t …
Dating Amber review – witty Irish coming-of-age yarn The appearance of an enjoyably naff sex education video delivered by a nun suggests early on that this coming-of-age film set in rural Kildare in 1995 …
Steve Priest obituary ‘There was one gig we did in Scotland where the girls were screaming so loud that I couldn’t hear us – and we were not a quiet band,” said Steve Pries …
Kenny Young obituary Kenny Young, who has died aged 79, was a gifted songwriter, musician and producer best known for co-writing the Grammy Hall of Fame song Under the Boa …
Miles Davis: where to start in his back catalogue The album to start with Kind of Blue (1959) Kind of Blue isn’t just the best introduction to Miles Davis, it’s the best introduction to jazz as a whol …
The naked truth about Showgirls: the 90s flop is a misunderstood gem Summary: Showgirls is one of those movies that doesn’t so much divide opinion as defy it. Critical vocabulary breaks down in the face of its transcendent vulga …
How would a five-year-old change James Bond's life? Daniel Craig has taken us to some brave new places during his time as James Bond. We’ve seen him destroy his ancestral home. We’ve watched the death o …
Could Secret Wars be Marvel's next climactic superhero smackdown? Marvel Studios has a long history of taking its most iconic comic book runs and adapting them into something new for the big screen. It’s like a cover …
John Boyega expresses thanks for Black Lives Matter support Star Wars actor John Boyega has expressed his thanks for the “love and support” he received after his high-profile intervention in the Black Lives Mat …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Creep Is there anything creepier than someone who’s just a little too friendly? Think about the stranger who tries to chit-chat on the Tube, the colleague w …
Bristol's Colston Hall commits to name change by autumn 2020 Bristol Music Trust has committed to changing the name of Colston Hall, the city’s flagship concert venue, by the autumn following the removal of the …
The King of Staten Island review – Pete Davidson winning in freewheeling comedy It is not strictly relevant, but this film briefly breaks the unwritten movie rule that cocaine is the drug for bad people. Heroin can be for tragic j …
Isserlis/Rushdie Momen review – joyful music making Summary: Steven Isserlis has been busy teaching, writing and studying Bach during the lockdown, explained the Radio 3 announcer. He hasn’t risked a Covid cut, …
'Why should I try to have a future?' The Weather Diaries, Lupa J and a she-wolf's lament There had been previous obsessions; with eagles, with kangaroos. But when Imogen Jones first saw Princess Mononoke, a 1997 Japanese anime film that wa …
'We could go to the wall in 12 weeks' – are we just going to let classical music die? Summary: From top to bottom, from big to small, from freelancer to staffer, from humble hall to grand auditorium, the world of classical music is facing its bi …
Ewen Bremner: 'They should let Irvine Welsh script the Tiger King movie' I live in Harlem in New York and I’m quarantined on my own. The streets are very calm. As an actor I’m quite adapted to waiting around on set and betw …
Why musicians are switching to Twitch to broadcast from home Summary: Rich Medina is one of the most respected DJs in the music industry, spinning hip-hop, house, soul, afrobeat, funk and dance tunes for audiences around …
'A reconsideration of the white male cowboy': the rise of ambient country For a few hours one Tuesday last May, Brooklyn felt like a lonesome prairie. Oakland-based composer and guitarist Chuck Johnson had taken the opening …
Bonnie Pointer: from country to disco, this Sister did it for herself There were effectively two different versions of the Pointer Sisters. There was the 80s hit machine, a trio whose sound existed somewhere between soul …
I've never seen ... The Blues Brothers Who would have thought a genial comedy, 40 years old, would be so thoroughly refracted by current events? Whatever one might have expected from a firs …
Don Weller obituary Don Weller, a world-class saxophonist with a big sound, a big presence and a capricious improviser’s imagination, sometimes seemed more at home playin …
'Urban' no more: black British music execs call for industry reforms A collective of senior black music industry executives from companies including Warner, Sony, Universal Music Group, BMG, Live Nation, Spotify and the …
The Skin of Others review – Balang Tom E Lewis's final film is a fascinating look at the life of Douglas Grant Film-maker and scholar Tom Murray does not pretend there is a single “correct” way to explore his subject Douglas Grant, an Indigenous Australian huma …
I've never seen ... Heaven's Gate To this day, the notoriety that precedes Heaven’s Gate is as outsized as the film’s 216-minute runtime: as the largest critical and commercial flop of …
'The older I get, the less I fear': meet the Italian Larry David In 2000, after a decade of caring for his ailing mother in her large flat in Rome, Gianni Di Gregorio wrote a comedy about a bloke called Gianni who l …
Taylor Swift: 'Racial injustice has been ingrained in US state government' Taylor Swift has accused local and state governments in the US of harbouring institutional racism, and has called on her fans to elect candidates comm …
'It reminded me I should not go quietly': readers' favourite UK No 1s The Commodores: Three Times a Lady To make up for the shocking shortage of ballads in the 100, here’s one of the biggest, written for Frank Sinatra be …
YG, Che Lingo, Kendrick Lamar: the protest songs of Black Lives Matter 2020 The slow and inhumane killing of George Floyd, coupled with the frustration of lockdown and mass unemployment, have created the conditions necessary f …
Rebecca Frayn: 'One silver lining in the pandemic is that we can rebuild green' We’re in lockdown with my 20-year-old daughter and one of our 27-year-old twin sons. On good days, life in lockdown is idyllic. All of the sunshine an …
UK orchestras may not survive coronavirus pandemic, conductors warn Two of Britain’s most influential conductors, Sir Simon Rattle and Sir Mark Elder, have warned of a “devastated landscape” in classical music after th …
Da 5 Bloods review – Spike Lee ignites a Vietnam cocktail of fire and fury Spike Lee has shown up with an insurgent filmic uproar to match the uproar in the world. Da 5 Bloods is a paintball gun loaded with real bullets: a bl …
Eddie Redmayne joins Daniel Radcliffe in opposing JK Rowling's trans comments Fantastic Beasts star Eddie Redmayne has joined Harry Potter lead actor Daniel Radcliffe in criticising JK Rowling’s recent comments about trans peopl …
Paul Lewis review – Beethoven and Schubert shaped with muscularity and grace Beethoven and Schubert have long been the cornerstones of Paul Lewis’s repertory, and for his Wigmore Hall/Radio 3 lockdown recital, he gave us a work …
Virus Tropical review – energetic, dazzling animated rite of passage Summary: Far from being some Covid-19 cash-in, the title of this beautiful 2017 Colombian-Ecuadorian animation refers to a dismissive doctor’s initial diagnosi …
Ezio Bosso obituary My collaborator and friend Ezio Bosso, who has died aged 48 of cancer, was an award-winning Italian composer and conductor. He relentlessly toured and …
Netflix, Apple and Stan could be required to boost Australian content Streaming services such as Netflix, Stan, Apple and Amazon could soon be required to pay into a fund for Australian productions or to make shows in Au …
The Fanatic review – John Travolta plumbs the depths in grisly stalker flick This marks yet another rung down on John Travolta’s ladder of career ignominy after his most recent flops, Gotti and Speed Kills. It’s a grotesque dra …
You Don't Nomi – the curious allure of Showgirls It’s 25 years since screenwriter Joe Eszterhas and director Paul Verhoeven released their jaw-dropping example of what can only be called hardcore sof …
This Is Not a Movie review – the drama and tragedy of the Middle East 1980: Middle East correspondent Robert Fisk dodges gunfire in bombed-to-rubble streets on the frontline of the Iran-Iraq war. Cut to 2018, and Fisk, n …
Paul Weller: On Sunset review – warm, wise and still capable of surprise In 2014, Paul Weller released his umpteenth compilation, surveying a career now into its sixth decade. More Modern Classics came with sleeve notes wri …
Willy Wands obituary Summary: My friend Willy Wands, who has died aged 67 of pancreatic cancer, was, over four decades, the producer of a number of films, including, in recent year …
Rupert Hine obituary Summary: The musical career of Rupert Hine, who has died aged 72, might have been designed as the antidote to pigeonholing. Starting in the early 1960s as half …
Steven  Berkoff's Tell Tale Heart review – voraciously hammy gothic More likely to bore the bejesus out of you than chill the marrow of your bones, here’s a film of Edgar Allan Poe’s The Tell-Tale Heart, a gothic short …
The greatest film scenes shot on the River Thames – ranked! Summary: 10. Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (2007) This film follows a well-understood movie tradition of using the Thames, with its twists and turn …
Verdi: Otello review – Kaufmann captains the drama but Pappano steers There are only a handful of stars now for whom a major label will finance a full studio recording, and in the top three is Jonas Kaufmann, whose debut …
Stormzy to donate £10m to black British causes over 10 years Stormzy has announced he will donate £10m to black British causes over the next 10 years: “Organisations, charities and movements that are committed t …
Adam Walker/James Baillieu review – remarkable playing but recital lacked real centre Summary: Looking through the four weeks of the Wigmore Hall’s current lunchtime series it’s clear that the emphasis is on mainstream repertoire, programmes aim …
'I loved the weirdness' – can Laura Marling's crowdless gig rescue live music? After three months of shuttered concert venues, hearing Laura Marling’s voice eddy around the Union Chapel in north London is like being dosed with a …
Country group Lady Antebellum change name to Lady A due to slavery connotations Summary: Lady Antebellum, the trio who have topped the US country album charts five times, are to change their name to Lady A due to the slavery connotations h …
Gulabo Sitabo review - mildewed mansion drama bustles and crumbles The first big Indian release of 2020 to divert towards streaming is an offbeam, strangely mismanaged parable about property management that renders it …
Spike Lee: 'Race relations today are a direct response to having a black president' For more than three decades, Spike Lee has been one of the most vital forces in film-making. His latest movie, Da 5 Bloods – about four African Americ …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Private Life Hollywood’s depiction of infertility over the years has been, well, let’s say sporadic. When it does make it on to the screen, it’s usually played for …
My favourite film aged 12: Aliens Full disclosure: Aliens was my favourite film when I was 12, and Aliens is still my favourite film in 2020. I am now 35 years old and have flecks of g …
Jehnny Beth: To Love Is to Live review – solo Savage defiant and intimate Summary: Jehnny Beth is best known as the frontwoman of Savages: the always monochromatic, post-punk four-piece whose dissonant debut album was nominated for t …
Tamar-kali: Shirley Original Soundtrack review – fascinatingly eerie and claustrophobic Born and based in Brooklyn, Tamar-kali leads a broad array of musical projects. She fronts a PJ Harvey-ish rock outfit under her own name, and feature …
Chloe x Halle: Ungodly Hour review – classy R&B from precocious all-rounders The talents of Chloe and Halle Bailey have never languished in obscurity. As young children, the Atlanta-born sisters acted in big-budget movies; when …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Rosalía ft Travis Scott, Diplo, Rak-Su Rosalía ft Travis Scott TKN Rosalía’s here to rescue summer with two minutes and nine seconds of furious reggaeton. TKN reunites her with Travis Scott …
The US is still segregated – but is our democracy up to the challenge? With the crescendo of public outcry around the killing of George Floyd, I fear there’s little need for another person voicing a commonly held opinion. …
All together now: virtual choirs thrive amid lockdown Summary: Concerts and choir practice may be off the table during lockdown, but in the face of isolation and adversity people are turning to the power of song m …
Roderick Williams and Joseph Middleton review – expressive and nuanced ‘Woman’s Hour”, the title that Roderick Williams had given to his lunchtime recital with the pianist Joseph Middleton, was only slightly tongue in che …
Taylor Swift: monuments that celebrate racist figures 'make me sick' Taylor Swift is calling on Tennessee lawmakers to remove racist monuments, arguing “villains don’t deserve statues”. “As a Tennessean, it makes me sic …
Bob Dylan: Rough and Rowdy Ways review – a testament to his eternal greatness In recent weeks, musicians have come up with an impressive variety of ways to keep their fans amused during lockdown. There have been online listening …
Gone With the Wind and the damaging effect of Hollywood racism There is a scene in 1974’s underground blaxploitation-era film The Spook Who Sat by the Door where a group of black militants comically mock the ubiqu …
‘I love characters that are optimistic and sweet’ – meet Sam Richardson, comedy’s hidden gem If you want to watch Sam Richardson, it’s a good idea to just head for the best comedy you can think of, because he’ll probably be in it. He played an …
Classical home listening: Alina Ibragimova's Shostakovich; Haydn with the Dudoks; Britten on film • The Russian-British violinist Alina Ibragimova, versatile, virtuosic and astute in every kind of repertoire (listen to her play Bach), has establish …
One to watch: Drab City Drab City make strangely cinematic music, full of flutes, vibraphones, soft vocals and glitchy beats. Their sound recalls bands such as Broadcast, Tin …
Laura Marling live at Union Chapel review: up close and virtual Gone, for the time being, is the staticky hush of an expectant crowd at an old-school gig. Cancelled, too, is the wider tour Laura Marling would have …
Kevin Figes Quartet: Changing Times review – constantly fascinating I didn’t think I was going to like this album at first, when greeted by the strains of an electronic sequencer. But this faded into a beautifully play …
Da 5 Bloods review – Spike Lee goes all out in Vietnam Last year, Spike Lee won his first competitive Academy Award as co-writer of BlacKkKlansman, a stranger-than-fiction tale of an African-American cop i …
Jehnny Beth: To Love Is to Live review – intense and provocative Camille “Jehnny Beth” Berthomier spent the 00s fronting Savages, a post-punk outfit dedicated to discomfort and artistic provocation. The solo Jehnny …
The Ground Beneath My Feet review – taut Austrian sibling psychodrama Existing in the kind of corporate shark tank that has its own bravado slang for pulling a 48-hour shift takes a particular kind of ruthlessness. Excel …
Rose City Band: Summerlong review – a gorgeous record As frontman of San Francisco psyche-rockers Wooden Shjips and one half of the more Krautrock-influenced Moon Duo (with partner Sanae Yamada), Ripley J …
The classic film I've never seen: Halloween I’m a wimp when it comes to horror films, as anyone who has ever sat next to me in a cinema while I’ve been yelping my head off will tell you. I’ve fo …
The Apartment at 60: is this Billy Wilder's finest film? Jack Lemmon often gets referred to as the great everyman of American actors – down-to-earth, identifiable, a little put-upon but fundamentally decent. …
Drive-in concerts: music to the ears of audience- (and cash-) starved bands Summary: Before covid, the surf rock duo Hockey Dad would usually launch a new album with a string of record store shows. “But obviously we can’t do that right …
Radioactive review – Marie Curie biopic fast-forwards to Hiroshima Summary: The Geiger counter is ticking moderately for this forthright biopic of Marie Curie, born Maria Skłodowska: the historic double-Nobel winner in physics …
The original culture war: why modern-day film-makers are still drawn to 17th-century England A nation divided and thrown into chaos, the old regime under threat, new dreams of freedom, equality and justice checked by violent oppression masquer …
My streaming gem: why you should watch The Point The glorious thing about streaming, at this point in its history, is the sense that eventually everything that was lost will be eventually found somew …
Keith Tippett: British jazz pianist dies age 72 The British jazz pianist and composer Keith Tippett has died aged 72. A post on Tippett’s official Facebook page did not disclose the cause of death. …
Bootsy Collins: 'We're all funky, just not all of us know it' At the age of 17, William “Bootsy” Collins packed up his homemade bass guitar and left home to tour the world with James Brown. He was heading off in …
Barbra Streisand buys Disney shares for George Floyd's daughter George Floyd’s youngest child is now a Disney shareholder, thanks to Barbra Streisand. Six-year-old Gianna Floyd posted a photograph of herself on Ins …
Psycho at 60: the enduring power of Hitchcock's shocking game-changer Summary: The defining shot in Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho is not any of the images in the famed shower sequence, or the overhead of the private detective getting …
I've never seen ... American Honey Summary: Somehow I missed American Honey when it came out in 2016, although I knew just what Andrea Arnold is capable of. Her Wuthering Heights had only half w …
'We want people to feel they have a home': No Signal, black Britain's new radio station ‘One of the most lyrical, badman tunes ever!” says dancehall DJ Levels, after Real Badman by Vybz Kartel has just played. “This represents Jamaica – t …
Tulisa denies accusations of racism from X Factor contestant Misha B Pop singer and TV presenter Tulisa has denied accusations of racism and bullying made against her by Misha B, a contestant on talent show The X Factor …
My favourite film aged 12: Cruel Intentions I don’t know what it says about me that my favourite film aged 12 is my favourite film aged 30. It could mean that I am enduringly loyal, knew my mind …
Oscars 2021: how shifting the awards later favours the old guard The most recent Academy Awards ceremony took place on 9 February, the earliest date in the institution’s 92-year history, as a calendar-shifting exper …
Dion: 'When I heard my album sober, I thought "Wow – heroin didn't touch it"' Dion DiMucci was 13, maybe 14, when he first sang in a club for money, roughly the same time as he picked up a heroin habit that lasted 15 years. He g …
Ricky Valance obituary It is now hard to appreciate the national outcry over Ricky Valance’s record Tell Laura I Love Her in the summer of 1960. It told of a young boy who e …
7500 review – Amazon hijacking thriller can't get off the ground There’s a stale whiff surrounding Amazon’s medium-concept hijacking thriller 7500. It’s a film that plays like a piece of dated and uneasy United 93 f …
'There's money to be made': buskers return to Britain's high streets On 13 March, singer-songwriter Sherika Sherard completed her final busk at London Bridge. Given the increasing seriousness of the coronavirus pandemic …
The Day After I'm Gone review – stylish study of a grieving father and daughter Israeli film-maker Nimrod Eldar makes an accomplished and worthwhile feature debut with this very intelligent, character-driven drama, which he has wr …
Suites, shoots and leaves: Spanish opera house reopens with concert for plants Summary: Attendees of the first post-lockdown concert at Barcelona’s Liceu opera house next week will not need masks or gloves, nor will they be required to ob …
K-pop singer Yohan dies aged 28 Kim Jeong-hwan, known as Yohan in the Korean pop group TST, has died aged 28. TST’s record label, KJ Entertainment confirmed the news, saying: “We are …
The Dead and the Others review – shimmering story of tribal culture Summary: This is a mysterious ethno-fictional fable of the indigenous Krahô people in north-eastern Brazil; it was a prizewinner at Cannes last year for Brazil …
Bryce Dallas Howard: 'Dads changing diapers is still somehow revolutionary' When actor Bryce Dallas Howard started making the documentary Dads, her family was clear: this was not going to be about them. Her father Ron, the Osc …
'It's only important if you eat food': inside a film on the honeybee crisis Every February, Brett Adee joins a caravan of semi-trucks, bound for California’s Central Valley, loaded with millions upon millions of fragile, preci …
Madonna: where to start in her back catalogue Summary: The album to start with Like a Prayer (1989) Madonna’s 1980s hits such as Holiday, Into the Groove and Like a Virgin are brilliantly captured on The I …
On a Magical Night review – peppy portrait of a crumbling marriage Christophe Honoré, now edging into veteran status with his 12th film, once again steps up to the oche of desire and infidelity. But this peppy, flight …
Keith Tippett obituary Few free-improvising musicians, singlemindedly stirring the soundworlds of lyricism, jagged dissonance, recognisable melody and raw noise, can bring a …
Kristen Stewart to play Princess Diana in new film Spencer Summary: Kristen Stewart is set to star as Diana, Princess of Wales, in a new drama from Pablo Larraín, the acclaimed Chilean director of Jackie. The film, cal …
Mobos founder's open letter highlights racism in UK music industry Kanya King, the founder of the Music of Black Origin awards (Mobos), has said negative media coverage nearly ended the event, in a wide-ranging open l …
To Kid Or Not to Kid review – why women choose to be childless British-born, New York-based film-maker Maxine Trump puts herself front and centre for this honest, heartfelt documentary about her own and other wome …
The Ground Beneath My Feet review – creepy phone calls dial up the fear The creepy phone call that’s coming from inside the house – a well-known scary-movie trope. The threat is more disturbingly intimate than you thought, …
Resistance review – mime star Marcel Marceau's wartime heroics Summary: A handsomely produced and well-meaning movie, but freighted with cliche, about the remarkable wartime career of mime legend Marcel Marceau in the Fren …
Duffy shares new song, River in the Sky Duffy has shared her second new song since revealing in February that she retreated from the public eye in the early 2010s after being drugged, held c …
Dame Vera Lynn, singer and 'forces' sweetheart', dies aged 103 Dame Vera Lynn, whose song We’ll Meet Again became an anthem of hope and resilience during the second world war, has died aged 103. Her family said th …
Dads review – stars report from the frontline of fatherhood You’ll need to stomach some Hollywood smuggery before getting to the good bits in this Apple TV documentary. It’s directed by the actor, Bryce Dallas …
Neil Howlett obituary Neil Howlett, who has died aged 85, was a singer of lustrous tone and keen musical intelligence, regarded as the most accomplished Verdian baritone in …
Clyne: Dance; Elgar Cello Concerto review – calm, motoric energy and gorgeous fusions Summary: Dance is Anna Clyne’s hugely impressive new cello concerto, written for the New York-based cellist Inbal Segev and first performed last year. Both the …
Sam Riley: 'The closer I got to fame, the more frightened I was of it' Science wasn’t Sam Riley’s thing at school. Instead, he stared out of the window dreaming of becoming an actor or a rock star. But for his latest role …
Vera Lynn: the best of the wartime spirit, not its continuation by other means That Vera Lynn was 103 years old is of no consequence. She was, in our mind’s eye, forever in her 20s, belting out the string of songs that helped sus …
Bursting for a return: could Sigourney Weaver resurrect the Alien franchise? Battlestar Galactica posited the idea that human civilisation operates on an endless wheel of evolution, technological boom and eventual destruction b …
We'll Meet Again: how toxic nostalgia twisted Vera Lynn's pop masterpiece From Captain Tom Moore’s chart-topping You’ll Never Walk Alone to Katherine Jenkins’ charity take on Vera Lynn’s We’ll Meet Again – a cover version as …
Michael Collins / Michael McHale review – sleek and stylish clarinet Summary: There might be no harps or harpsichords, trumpets or trombones, but woodwind instruments have been respectably represented in the Wigmore Hall’s curre …
Disclosure: behind Laverne Cox's Netflix documentary on trans representation In June 2014, Time magazine featured Laverne Cox, star of Netflix’s Orange is the New Black, on a cover that proclaimed America’s “Transgender Tipping …
You Should Have Left review – Kevin Bacon v evil house in flat horror There’s a maddeningly impossible rental home at the centre of the icy new thriller You Should Have Left, one that defies the laws of physics, torturin …
Werner Herzog: 'I'm fascinated by trash TV. The poet must not avert his eyes' The digital world, what a fabulous place, Werner Herzog declares from his home in Los Angeles. Fraught with danger. Filled with possibility. It is tha …
John Legend: Bigger Love - synths, snogging and schmaltz With 2016’s Darkness and Light, John Legend seemed ready to address the thorny side of love. Shifting from the syrupy, wedding-ready love songs that h …
From Pressure to The Last Tree: 10 of the best black British films Pressure As UK Black Lives Matter protests roar, and the foulness of the Windrush scandal festers, it is a crucial time to dive into black British his …
Saweetie's lockdown listening: 'All we are protesting for is equality, justice, our lives' I’ve been loving quarantine. Everything has been super-chilled; I’ve spent a lot of time by myself which has made me a more creative person. I’ve been …
Billie Eilish granted restraining order over man who repeatedly visited home A US judge has awarded pop singer Billie Eilish a restraining order against a man who repeatedly visited her family home. Prenell Rousseau, 24, who li …
Bessie Jones: Get in Union review – 60 songs straight from the gut and heart Summary: A woman from a small farming community in the state of Georgia, Bessie Jones was one of the most important traditional singers of the mid-20th century …
Fran Healy's lockdown listening: 'Travis are the opposite of Travis Scott' I’m quarantining in Los Angeles. We’ve lived here for three years and before that Berlin for 10 so I’ve been away from home since 2008. It’s beginning …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Shygirl + Arca, Mr Bungle, Travis Shygirl + Arca Unconditional Nothing else out this month sounds quite so hypnotically otherworldly as Shygirl’s team-up with the sonic polymath Arca. …
Bob Dylan's Rough and Rowdy Ways: discuss his five-star new album The reviews are in and critics have declared Bob Dylan’s new album his best in years. Sure, yes, certain outlets like to append that sobriquet to ever …
Bree Runway: ‘Without sounding cocky, Freddie Mercury reminds me of me’ Pop-rap superstar of the future Bree Runway is trying to unpick the reasons why her Apeshit video – an eccentric update of millennium-era R&B futurism …
Ian Holm: a virtuoso actor of steel, sinew – and charm There was always a cool, rational, weighted intelligence in Ian Holm. On screen, he was never exactly a heart-on-sleeve performer; he did not need or …
I've never seen … Con Air I was prepared to like Con Air and, happily, I was not disappointed. The overall impression of watching the 1997 action classic is a lot like riding t …
The night I watched Vera Lynn with Marlene Dietrich It was an El Alamein reunion in the Albert Hall. Monty was in his box. Vera Lynn and Marlene Dietrich were the stars. Vera Lynn was on stage alone, si …
Library of 450 film classics aims to lure audiences back to UK cinemas Summary: A consortium of studios, distributors and exhibitors are teaming up to present would-be cinemagoers with a – hopefully – irresistible package of class …
Allan Clayton / James Baillieu review – his voice soared through top notes gloriously Even before lockdown, some in the classical music industry were beginning to have conversations about how to cut down on air miles. And one thing the …
Husky, Jess Ribeiro, DMA's and more: Australian music for isolated times As some states begin to slowly open back up, Australia’s performing arts industry – hit harder, and earlier, than most others – is still, for the most …
Caitlin Harnett at The Lansdowne – live gigs make boisterous but socially distanced return to Sydney Down the length of some of Sydney’s main drags, plenty of people look to be failing at having a nice night out. It’s just gone 6pm but queues have for …
From the Pyramid stage to your sofa: how to recreate Glastonbury at home Thursday 17:00 OK, let’s be upfront: it is impossible to truly recreate the Glastonbury experience at home unless your home happens to be a 900-acre f …
'It's a man-made marvel': performers on why they love Glastonbury Joseph Mount (Metronomy) What are your memories of going to Glastonbury as a punter or performer? The first time I went I was 16 years old – in 1998, …
Streaming: the best Olivier Assayas films Summary: Many film-makers dream of their name becoming its own adjective. Hitchcockian, Tarantinoesque, Lynchian: all terms (some of them even validated by the …
Eliza Scanlen: 'Before I did Little Women, I was still quite afraid' By the age of 20, Eliza Scanlen had already played a full American anthology of roles, from dark and depraved (Amy Adams’s rollerskating, psychopathic …
UK public wary of live music as industry calls for £50m rescue package The UK’s grassroots music scene is calling for further financial support from the government, as new data shows audiences are wary of returning to liv …
Bob Dylan: Rough and Rowdy Ways review – enthralling, mischievous – and very male Greatness is often contested territory. Rough and Rowdy Ways, Bob Dylan’s 39th studio album, is awash with pre-eminence, both in its actual and its mo …
One to watch: AA Williams Summary: AA Williams had spent years studying classical music before stumbling across alt-metal titans Deftones in her mid-teens and becoming hooked on “all th …
On a Magical Night review – spotlight on a very Parisian marriage Maria (Chiara Mastroianni) is middle-aged, middle-class and suffering a midlife crisis in French writer-director Christophe Honoré’s impish, rarefied …
From the Band to Beyoncé: concert films to fill the live music black hole You don’t know what you’ve got till it’s gone. Since live music in the UK entered suspended animation on 16 March, even the most mundane aspects of gi …
Phoebe Bridgers: Punisher review – from the heart ‘The doctor put her hands over my liver,” sings Phoebe Bridgers on Garden Song. “She told me my resentment’s getting smaller.” Arresting lyrics such a …
Nadine Shah: 'I’m sick of celebrities in their huge gardens telling us to breathe' Summary: Nadine Shah, 34, was born in South Tyneside to a British-Norwegian mother and British-Pakistani father. Since her 2013 debut, Love Your Dum and Mad, h …
Tom Petty estate issues cease and desist over Trump's use of song Summary: The family of Tom Petty has issued a formal cease and desist letter to the Donald Trump campaign over its use of his song I Won’t Back Down at a rally …
White Riot review – whistle-stop tour of a 70s London uprising “We were trying to get people to understand racism as a white problem,” says Kate Webb, an early member of the Rock Against Racism movement, which eme …
Kay Bateman obituary My friend Kay Bateman, otherwise known as Kay Carroll, who has died of lung cancer aged 71, was the first manager of Mark E Smith’s band, the Fall. Al …
The future of music: ‘No one has anything positive to say about physically distanced gigs. At all’ Summary: Speaking selfishly, I miss volume the most. Tinnitus has been my constant plus-one for such a long time that it’s basically masochism – but it’s true. …
Ray BLK accuses rapper Ambush Buzzworl of sexual assault The British singer Ray BLK has accused Camden rapper Ambush Buzzworl of sexual assault. BLK tweeted that Ambush “aggressively” grabbed and shook her b …
Sports Team: Deep Down Happy review – debut album with plenty to say With an eloquence you’d hope for from a band made up of Cambridge graduates and an old-school penchant for slagging off their indie peers, London-base …
'It felt like the last show on Earth': the bittersweet rise of Rolling Blackouts Coastal Fever ‘It was like the tightening of a vice,” says Rolling Blackouts Coastal Fever’s Fran Keaney, of the encroaching lockdown measures that have put his ban …
'Factually impossible': Justin Bieber denies sexual assault allegation Summary: Justin Bieber has denied allegations that he sexually assaulted a woman in March 2014, sharing a series of tweets he believes prove that “this story i …
The Blues Brothers at 40: a manic musical romp that still sings today One of the longstanding hallmarks of a John Landis production are cameos from other film directors, which explains the fun incongruity of Jonathan Dem …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Lockout Lockout – a schlocky, daft and quite exceptionally loud 2012 sci-fi action flick from the trashier end of Luc Besson’s mind palace – is the kind of fi …
Fowl play: why colour-blind casting can also reinforce weary tropes Mainstream family entertainment has made progress when it comes to representation of non-white people, and Disney+’s lavish new fantasy Artemis Fowl t …
Sound recovery: how live music is returning to Munich It was at the end of May that I heard live music for the first time in almost three months. Not over Zoom or YouTube. There were no cameras or wireles …
'This is the best moment of my life,' he said, lying in the bath: Ian Holm remembered That sense of emotional ruthlessness was what made him such a brilliant Lear Richard Eyre Ian Holm was, as it was so often said, the actor’s actor. No …
Mariah Carey: where to start in her back catalogue The album to start with Butterfly (1997) Mariah Carey’s early 90s commercial megastardom was founded on the basis of her virtuoso vocal prowess, but h …
Jessie Ware webchat: your questions answered on sweaty clubs, table manners and activism But we leave on a tasty note: cedwards2817 asks I adore listening to Table Manners - what would your desert island meal and/or disc be? laurasnapes as …
Rock against racism? Metal's varied response to Black Lives Matter There’s no point denying metal has a more complicated relationship with race than many of its adherents would like to admit, or confront. At its most …
Nick Park and Jane Horrocks: how we made Chicken Run Nick Park, co-director/producer My sister kept pet chickens when we were kids and we’d make up these skits and cartoons where they’d always be the her …
Iestyn Davies/Elizabeth Kenny review – sweet melancholy and liquid beauty Summary: Music itself and its power to console was the underlying theme of countertenor Iestyn Davies’s lockdown recital with lutenist Elizabeth Kenny, a conce …
Martin Loveday obituary Summary: My brother-in-law Martin Loveday, who has died aged 62 from Covid-19 while undergoing treatment for myeloma, was an accomplished and popular cellist. …
Paul McCartney calls for meat to no longer be mandatory in England's school meals Sir Paul McCartney and his daughters Stella and Mary have joined a call to change guidance that makes it mandatory to serve fish, meat and dairy in En …
Joel Schumacher, Batman Forever and The Lost Boys director, dies aged 80 Director Joel Schumacher has died at the age of 80. The film-maker, whose hits included Batman Forever, St Elmo’s Fire and The Lost Boys, died of canc …
Joel Schumacher: a high gloss, star-making Hollywood showman The career of Joel Schumacher was that of a classic Hollywood alpha-player in the big-money 80s and 90s: a really smart operator who made a string of …
Irresistible review – Jon Stewart’s political non-satire for liberals is as dull as it gets Jon Stewart made his reputation as a smart political comedian and commentator on Comedy Central’s The Daily Show on TV, before quitting in 2015 to dev …
'We're not doing this to be ironic': are 100 Gecs the world's strangest band? For many US musicians, the height of ambition is winning a Grammy award. More ambitious performers might aim for an EGOT (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, Tony). …
Queen – not that one – to appear on postage stamps No, not that one – the rock band Queen are to feature on a series of UK postage stamps over the summer. They become only the third band to be honoured …
Jurassic Park and Jaws fight to top US box offices decades after their first releases It’s mega shark vs giant dinosaur at the US box office. Twenty-seven years after its first release, Steven Spielberg’s 1993 dinosaur-rampage blockbust …
Queer as folk: traditional British music is now telling LGBT stories In February, on the final night of this year’s Celtic Connections festival, folk music travelled through time in two directions at once. In the main r …
My favourite film aged 12: Monty Python and the Holy Grail Summary: I was at my friend Will’s house one weekend when he started saying “ni” in a shrill voice. “Ni!” my other friend Chris chimed in, and they laughed. It …
Megan Fox responds to outrage over 'sexualised' auditions for Michael Bay Megan Fox has responded to disquiet over reports of an audition she had with Michael Bay as a teenager, saying: “I was never assaulted or preyed upon. …
365 Days: the Netflix softcore porn film that people can't stop watching You have to feel a little sorry for Bong Joon-ho. Back in February, when Parasite swept the board at the Oscars, it felt like he was the new flag bear …
Benjamin Baker/Timothy Ridout review – violin and viola duo make the most of thin pickings Even the most passionate violinists and viola-players would hardly claim that the duo repertoire for their instruments is particularly distinguished. …
Idris Elba, Viola Davis and over 300 stars call on Hollywood to divest from police More than 300 black artists and executives, including Michael B Jordan, Idris Elba and Viola Davis, have called on Hollywood to divest from the police …
Mel Gibson denies Winona Ryder's allegation of bigoted comments Mel Gibson has denied Winona Ryder’s allegation that he made homophobic and antisemitic comments to her at a party. In a statement provided to Variety …
Lord of the Rings TV series issues New Zealand casting call for 'funky-looking' people Have an overbite, ears that stick out, small eyes, or a “bulbous or interesting” nose? Hollywood has finally come calling. A New Zealand talent agency …
Richard Dreyfuss: 'I was a bad guy for a number of years' Summary: “Don’t shoot, I win Oscar.” These words, says Richard Dreyfuss, are printed on the shirt he’s wearing under his grey jacket. He is at home in San Dieg …
My favourite film aged 12: Bridget Jones's Diary Bridget Jones loomed large over my early adolescence, by which I mean that a seven-foot-tall poster of Renée Zellweger in character hung behind my bes …
'A billboard with 50 years of layers': readers on Bob Dylan's Rough and Rowdy Ways Paul G, Devon Sometimes, it’s good to sit on the porch with ol’ Bob. He was quite the hurricane back in the day, but now he likes to sip whiskey and t …
The Spy review – a showbiz star goes undercover in the Third Reich For British history buffs interested in what the rest of northern Europe got up to during the second world war, The Spy would makes a solid double bil …
Never mind the ballads! How bardcore took over pop music Name: Bardcore. Age: A couple of months (if we ignore Sting). Musicologists may come to see 20 April as the starting point. Appearance: Modern hit son …
Cineworld staff launch petition to make customer face coverings compulsory Staff working for the Cineworld cinema chain have launched an online petition urging their bosses to make face coverings mandatory for customers once …
Gotham over a barrel: should Michael Keaton answer the call of Batman? Should Michael Keaton really be returning to the role of Gotham’s dark knight, 30 years on from originating the role for the modern era in 1989’s Batm …
Rodney P meets Kojey Radical: 'I don't want my son to always have to fight' Although separated by generations, there is a shared sense of black empowerment and rebellion coursing through the music of Rodney P and Kojey Radical …
On the Record review – chilling exposé on #MeToo and the music industry ‘If you are a rape survivor, you are a crime scene. Your life is a crime scene.” The speaker is the remarkable Drew Dixon, the supremely articulate an …
Good vibrations: how Bandcamp became the heroes of streaming When Ethan Diamond founded Bandcamp in 2008, he imagined it an alternative to MySpace: an easy-to-use website where bands could interact with fans and …
The Booksellers review – warm study of a fast-shifting subculture The interest of this garrulous, convivial documentary creeps up on you by degrees: a study of secondhand and antiquarian booksellers in New York City. …
Michael Eavis: Glastonbury could go bankrupt if it can't be staged in 2021 Glastonbury organisers Michael and Emily Eavis fear they could be in serious financial danger if the festival was cancelled again due to coronavirus. …
Ride Like a Girl review – Michelle Payne biopic is a feelgood victory lap The big-heartedness of this film won me over despite my utter ignorance of the racing world. It’s a bit hammy and TV-movie-ish, but you can’t help smi …
Woody Allen's new film to open San Sebastián film festival Rifkin’s Festival, the new film by Woody Allen, has been selected to open the San Sebastián film festival in Spain. Starring Elena Anaya, Louis Garrel …
Julie Walters' best film performances – ranked! 20. Before You Go (2002) Lewis Gilbert directed Walters in her seminal movie debut, Educating Rita, and although this stagey and subdued film (Gilbert …
Zemlinsky: Die Seejungfrau review – baffling neglect of a glorious mermaid There have been a number of occasions in the past few decades when it seemed as if the music of Alexander Zemlinsky would finally receive the attentio …
After 50 years, Glastonbury festival is a triumph of eccentric English culture The truth of the matter is that Glastonbury never really asked the Rolling Stones to play before – I heard they had thought about it, but no official …
Angela Hewitt review – intimate and introspective Bach Although more concerts at Wigmore Hall are planned for September, Angela Hewitt gave the penultimate recital in the current lunchtime series at the Lo …
'Indigenous voices at the centre': Taika Waititi signs on Māori writers for colonisation projects Taika Waititi’s production company has signed on a group of Māori writers to work on three forthcoming projects about colonisation, according to repor …
From Bowie to Beyoncé: Glastonbury's 50 greatest moments Summary: 1. The first year (1970) Glastonbury festival’s first ever booking came from Michael Eavis serenading his cows with the Kinks. “I was playing Lola to …
Martin Parr's Glastonbury tour – photo essay This week I should have been experiencing and photographing the Glastonbury festival for the first time. That it would have been my first is for me is …
Carmine Street Guitars review – pure uncut music-geek erotica This extraordinarily pleasant, restful film is essentially the digital equivalent of hanging out in the Manhattan shop of the title, a Greenwich Villa …
My streaming gem: why you should watch 2 Days in Paris Now that we’ve all been self-isolating and socially distancing for 68 months (note: I may have lost track of the exact number), 2 Days In Paris seems …
Freddie Fox: ‘Someone may do or say arrogant things, but that’s not who they are’ Freddie Fox – son of Edward, nephew of James, brother of Emilia and cousin to the Question Time racism refusenik Laurence – is under no illusions abou …
Haim: Women in Music Pt III review – a cathartic walk on the blue side of life On Haim’s third album, frontwoman Danielle drives endlessly around LA, away from a shaky relationship and her own malaise, sometimes towards illicit d …
Her finest hour: why Glastonbury festival owes so much to Churchill’s granddaughter Normally in late April, the family home where Haggis McLeod raised his daughter Jess would be chaotic. There would be paperwork up to the ceilings – l …
Trax Records: Larry Heard and Robert Owens sue for $1m 'unpaid' royalties Summary: The foundational house music producers Larry Heard (AKA Mr Fingers) and Robert Owens are suing Trax Records for allegedly unpaid royalties. In a feder …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Kiesza, Jorja Smith, Dalai Lama Kiesza Love Me With Your Lie Even if she had never released anything else after her 2014 banger Hideaway, pirouetting firecracker Kiesza would for eve …
What I'm really watching: David Lynch's YouTube channel Summary: Our morning routines have changed. More energetic types may have been bouncing out of bed for a virtual PE lesson, and domestic deities are shuffling …
'It's a wake-up call': behind the film urging investment in pre-school education Maria Hernandez, a single mother of four in Waco, Texas, ferries her children to school in between two job shifts, midnight to 6am, and 8am to 5pm. Sh …
US rapper Huey, known for hit Pop, Lock & Drop It, killed in shooting aged 32 Summary: Huey, the US rapper who scored a major hit in 2006 with Pop, Lock & Drop It, has been killed aged 32. Huey, whose real name was Lawrence Franks Jr, wa …
Mark Padmore/Mitsuko Uchida review – recital series ends on compelling and sombre note When June’s Wigmore Hall concerts were announced one wondered if it were a misjudgment to end them with Schubert’s Winterreise. To be fair, the schedu …
Beyoncé's classic Glastonbury 2011 set – as it happened (nine years ago) So that was it. For the full experience you now need to get Zane Lowe on to smirk that he didn’t see Beyoncé as he was watching “real music” (Queens o …
Streaming: gaslighting films that will have you doubting your sanity In the before times, when films were still being released in cinemas, The Invisible Man staked an early claim as the year’s best mainstream blockbuste …
Classical home listening: from the salon to storm-tossed Aldeburgh • This week we enter the salon. Please don’t leave. While not quite champing at the bit for CDs of music by Alfredo Piatti (1822-1901), a star of that …
Haim: Women in Music Pt III review – their most direct album yet A certain lightness has always played about the work of Haim, the three multi-instrumentalist sisters from Los Angeles. Even as their two critically a …
Kansas Smitty's: Things Happened Here review – irresistibly groovy Kansas Smitty’s is a live-music bar in Hackney, east London. It’s also the name of the seven-piece band that runs the place and calls it home, a band …
Adele's classic Glastonbury 2016 set – as it happened (four years ago) Summary: Earlier on Adele said: “I don’t really have many upbeat happy songs which I think is why a lot of people moaned about me coming tonight, but fuck you, …
Glamour, glitz and artificially light skin: Bollywood stars in their own racism row The Bollywood film industry is a global phenomenon built on glitz and glamour. But it has also faced accusations of being among the biggest purveyors …
Irresistible review – subtle satire from Jon Stewart “I don’t kid,” Donald Trump said last week, when asked if he was (as White House aides had claimed) “joking” about telling his Coronavirus team to “sl …
On the Record review – #MeToo music doc is essential viewing This essential documentary from Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering offers a much needed recalibration of #MeToo, taking into account race and the additional w …
Nadine Shah: Kitchen Sink review – razor-sharp observations North-eastern singer-songwriter Nadine Shah won acclaim – and a Mercury prize nomination – for her 2017 album, Holiday Destination, in part because sh …
Jessie Ware: What's Your Pleasure? review – rooted in lustful disco Summary: Jessie Ware emerged in 2010, lending her silken vocals to electro producer SBTRKT. A solo career followed but, while the London singer-songwriter’s fi …
UK cinemas set for worst year since 1996 due to coronavirus The UK cinema industry is on track for its worst year since 1996, with box office and advertising revenue set to be down almost £900m due to the impac …
Beyoncé urges voters to 'dismantle a racist and unequal system' in the US Beyoncé has been given the humanitarian award at the BET awards, using her speech to encourage viewers to vote “like our life depends on it” in the up …
Forgotten dreams: is Werner Herzog’s brand overshadowing his work? It used to be that a new movie by Werner Herzog was an anticipated event; these days it’s more of an “Oh, another one”. Herzog sure seems to be churni …
My favourite film aged 12: Enter the Dragon It was the summer of 1984 and while most of my friends were engaged in the bitter culture war that was Duran Duran v Culture Club, I was obsessed with …
A cut above: António Variações, Portugal's queer pop superstar In the midst of wild olive trees, a muscular man sporting pink hair and a woman’s swimming costume stares into a mirror. There, at the meeting point o …
UK judge rules against Johnny Depp over ‘drugs texts’ in libel case Johnny Depp has breached an order in a libel case by failing to disclose texts that apparently show him trying to obtain drugs, the high court has rul …
Homemade review – Kristen Stewart leads Netflix's lockdown short films Here is a short film anthology with a luxury gloss and prestige sheen, curated for Netflix by the Chilean director Pablo Larraín, his brother Juan de …
'I bought these items and I couldn’t stand them': inside the mind of a Batman collector In the community and in the media there is widespread awareness about many kinds of addictions – from drug and alcohol dependencies to food, sex, poki …
About bloody time: is cinema finally going with the flow of period sex? Summary: When it comes to taboo subjects on screen, period sex serves up a double whammy. Intercourse and menstruation – who wants to see that, right? Certainl …
‘It’s like we just fell on to this planet’: the rise of psych-rockers Khruangbin Onstage, the Texan trio Khruangbin are a strange sight to behold. At their sold-out show at London’s near-5,000 capacity O2 Academy Brixton last Decem …
Johnny Mandel, Oscar-winning composer behind M*A*S*H theme, dies aged 94 Johnny Mandel, the Oscar and Grammy-winning composer behind the theme from M*A*S*H and more, has died aged 94. Details of his death have not been rele …
John McKenzie obituary midMy friend John McKenzie, who has died aged 64 of cancer, was a consummate bass player who recorded and toured with acts such as Lionel Richie, Bob …
Cinema giants delay reopening in UK and US as movie releases stall The UK’s largest chain of cinemas has pushed back its scheduled reopening date by three weeks, in response to further delays to the opening of key tit …
Howard Goodall writes choral tribute to health workers who died of coronavirus Choirs may have been forced to stop gathering due to the Covid-19 pandemic, but the London Symphony Chorus has found a way to keep singing – while hon …
Seat of the problem: why does Christopher Nolan hate chairs? We still don’t know all that much about Christopher Nolan’s upcoming Tenet. We know the stars, and that things appear to go backwards in it, but that’ …
Hollywood comedy legend Carl Reiner dies aged 98 Carl Reiner, the veteran comic and film-maker renowned for his double act with Mel Brooks as well as directing a string of hit comedies including The …
Carl Reiner: farewell to the heavyweight master of American comedy As the 21st-century dawned, it had looked as if comedy legend Carl Reiner’s final moment in the spotlight might be his small bittersweet role in Steve …
'We used to shout back: No, you get 'em off!' – Girlschool on 40 years of rocking It’s hard to fathom why Girlschool aren’t more celebrated. Forty years on from their first album, Demolition – released in June 1980 – and they are st …
'We had been beat down a lot': the story behind 60s protest anthem Dancing in the Street A few weeks ago, the Motown singer Martha Reeves went to her first protest march since this historic wave began. “I saw people from everywhere, walkin …
Mickey Madden, Maroon 5 bassist, arrested on domestic violence charges Mickey Madden, bassist with pop-rock group Maroon 5, has been arrested on charges of domestic violence. Los Angeles police confirmed the arrest to the …
Beethoven: where to start with his music It’s not only because this year is the 250th anniversary of his birth that Ludwig van Beethoven (1770-1827) is the obvious composer with whom to begin …
'One of my singles made £3.58': Manga Saint Hilare, grime's overlooked MC Manga Saint Hilare should be out touring his new album Make It Out Alive but, like the rest of us, he’s at home using his time to learn new things. “I …
Lynn + Lucy review – gruelling tragedy with a batsqueak of horror Fyzal Boulifa is a young British director of Moroccan heritage who was Bafta-nominated for his short film The Curse and now makes his fiercely impress …
A White, White Day review – spiralling rage and stunning force This bizarre and sometimes scary film from Iceland has a way of keeping you off balance and on the edge of your seat. It is a psychological drama-thri …
After Pop Smoke's death, can UK drill producers maintain their US success? For a few joyful, sweaty months last summer, Welcome to the Party by Brooklyn drill rapper Pop Smoke was the sound of New York. His smoky baritone see …
Film Title Poem review – scratched, dancing, scrunched-up celluloid A cheese dream of strangeness is one way to describe this brief experimental piece from 2016 by the Los Angeles artist and collagist Jennifer West, wh …
Infamous review – a gonzo shot at radical outlaw glamour The performances are a couple of drawers down from the top in this Nouveau Bonnie and Clyde romp; it features Bella Thorne – from the recent teen-abst …
Ida Haendel obituary The Polish-born violinist Ida Haendel, who has died aged 96, enthralled audiences around the world with a combination of classical rigour and romantic …
Geoffrey Rush case: Daily Telegraph and Nationwide News lose defamation appeal against actor The Sydney Daily Telegraph will have to pay the actor Geoffrey Rush a record $2.9m in damages after the tabloid lost its appeal against a historic def …
Inheritance review – preposterous and paper-thin New York thriller It’s bold of Lily Collins, daughter of Phil Collins, to star in a psychological thriller called Inheritance. She stars as Lauren Monroe, dynasty scion …
Airplane! at 40: the best spoof comedy ever made? Even in the anarchic heyday of the Marx brothers at Paramount Pictures, when they turned out vaudevillian free-for-alls such as Horse Feathers and Duc …
Think Like a Dog review – Feds bark as pet wisdom melts into syrup They say an actor should never work with animals or children. But a kid and a talking dog are the best things about this otherwise pretty hopeless att …
Margo Price: That's How Rumors Get Started review – country survivor who can take on anything Earlier this year, in a round of interviews to promote her third album – its release ultimately delayed by the coronavirus pandemic – Margo Price anno …
'Every black man have to fight': Buju Banton on prison and liberation At the end of 2018, the reggae star Buju Banton returned to Jamaica after almost seven years in a US prison, and Norman Manley international airport w …
'I had this image of my husband making love to a tree': directors on filming shorts for Netflix's Homemade “Shall we take a tour of the Vatican?” the Pope asks the Queen. Except his holiness and her majesty are not actually in the Vatican, they are in the h …
Dallapiccola: Il Prigioniero review –  hope, despair and musical muscle in fine prison opera Luigi Dallapiccola composed four stage works. One of them, the “sacred representation” Job, has hardly been heard since its premiere 70 years ago, whi …
Top director to shoot biopic about Beatles manager Brian Epstein An award-winning director, who has worked with Paul McCartney on music videos, is to direct a major British film about Brian Epstein, the visionary ma …
'Socially distanced Venetian gondolas!' – Rufus Wainwright on his dream festival Location I am a big fan of Venice and my husband and I have spent quite a bit of time there. Even when it’s teeming with tourists – which it won’t be …
'Stupidly, feverishly excited': Proms performers on heading back to the Royal Albert Hall Isata Kanneh-Mason I’ve grown up watching and admiring the Proms, I have been part of the audience for so many concerts in previous years and the leve …
BBC Proms: details announced of festival behind closed doors There will be orchestras of Mozart and Beethoven size rather than Mahler and Shostakovich size but at least they will be performing live from the stag …
From Eskimo Joe to Hearts and Rockets: Australia's best new music for July Eskimo Joe – Say Something For fans of: Coldplay, INXS, the Killers It took Eskimo Joe a handful of novelty singles and two albums of intricatepop bef …
Vivica A Fox: 'Black Lives Matter is going to be Trump's demise' Summary: It is 8am and Vivica A Fox, the star of two Independence Day films, two seasons of Curb Your Enthusiasm, both parts of Kill Bill and, latterly, two Sh …
Mark Cousins on his dream festival: 'Mohammad-Ali Talebi’s Bag of Rice is projected on to Dolly Parton's bedsheet' There have been film festivals for more than seven decades. In that time, they have been great at telling the story of cinema, but they are everywhere …
Saroj Khan, renowned Bollywood choreographer, dies aged 71 Saroj Khan, a top Bollywood choreographer, has died in a Mumbai hospital, her family has announced. She was 71. The three-time National Award winner w …
From Glastonbury to Bluedot: 10 of the best festivals for summer 2021 Glastonbury Since the 2020 festival season has been wiped out by the pandemic, what about next year’s offering of rescheduled musical delights? Things …
Denai Moore: Modern Dread review – hypnotic, surrealist bid for freedom In her previous releases Elsewhere and We Used to Bloom, British-Jamaican artist Denai Moore incorporated R&B, folk and electronic influences, positio …
Jay-Z's Team Roc call for prosecution of police officer who shot and killed 3 men Jay-Z’s social justice initiative Team Roc has called for a Wisconsin police officer to be fired and prosecuted, after he shot and killed three people …
'I'm like a plant without water': why metal bands are suffering during coronavirus To some outsiders, metal appears chaotic, violent and devoid of emotional value, but inside the message is one of solidarity. Nothing exemplifies this …
Socially distanced outdoor music venue to open in Newcastle in August The UK’s first large-scale socially distanced music venue is opening in Newcastle this summer. Virgin Money Unity Arena, to be installed at Newcastle …
Nul points: why Netflix's Eurovision film hits all the wrong notes Summary: The terrible sadness at the heart of Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga is that the film just doesn’t get Eurovision. Almost all other di …
From Skullcrusher to Jockstrap: the bands who sound nothing like their names Skullcrusher What they should sound like A biker gang of bionic speed metal abattoir workers playing guitars made by stringing pneumatic drills with e …
The Old Guard review – Netflix immortality thriller won't live long in the memory A sort-of-dull title for a sort-of-dull film. This is basically a two-hour dollop of action-movie product, teased out to look like a superhero origin …
Mission impossible? How to shoot a blockbuster in the coronavirus era This month, in theory, the latest Jurassic World sequel goes back into production on a London sound stage. And Wednesday – 1 July – was the day that H …
Josh Pyke, the Veronicas, Lime Cordiale and more: Australian music for isolated times As some states begin to slowly open back up, Australia’s arts industry is still largely in lockdown – and the music industry was hit harder, and earli …
Reel challenge: what will cinema look like after lockdown is relaxed? Cinema is back at last! Less with a big, cannonball splash off the high board than a tentative, slow-motion easing in, as if entering a very cold swim …
Streaming: the best new Canadian films When the major national cinemas are rounded up, Canada rarely gets much of a look-in: sometimes blurred with American cinema, sometimes with French, t …
‘We’re the explicit Vengaboys’: meet Bad Boy Chiller Crew, Bradford's bassline stars Summary: It is a sweltering afternoon in Minsk, Belarus, yet Bad Boy Chiller Crew are looking decidedly, well, chilled. Already an underground sensation in Wes …
Classical home listening: of love and death and snails • The title Love and Death (Orchid Classics) could incorporate nearly all music ever written. The Navarra String Quartet, whose playing has a transpar …
Earl Cameron, 'Britain's first black film star', dies aged 102 Earl Cameron, who with his debut role in the 1951 film Pool of London, became one of the first significant black actors in British cinema, has died ag …
Paul Weller: On Sunset review – a mellower modfather When you think of Paul Weller, you do not picture him on Hollywood’s notorious Sunset Strip. Baked either by the sun or lurid neon, a tourist hell tra …
One to watch: Remi Wolf Summary: While she begrudgingly refers to her trippy, kaleidoscopic musical melange as “funky soul pop”, 24-year-old California musician Remi Wolf isn’t a huge …
Family Romance, LLC review – Werner Herzog's moving rent-a-family tale According to its director, Werner Herzog, this surreal, strangely moving tragicomedy, based on Elif Batuman’s 2018 New Yorker article about Japan’s re …
Mulatu Astatke & Black Jesus Experience: To Know Without Knowing review – an absorbing ride Like one of its sinuous melodies, Ethiopian jazz continues to take unexpected turns. Melbourne’s Black Jesus Experience are one such, an eclectic eigh …
Neil Young says Trump's use of songs at Mount Rushmore 'not OK with me' After two of his songs were used by Donald Trump at Mount Rushmore on Friday, Neil Young had a simple message for the president: “This is not OK with …
Kanye West declares he will run for US president in 2020 Just when you thought 2020 couldn’t get any weirder, rapper Kanye West declared his candidacy for US president. The unlikely challenger to Donald Trum …
Lynn + Lucy review – a devastating tale of friends disunited A pair of electrifying performances lie at the heart of this terrific first feature by writer-director Fyzal Boulifa, a modern fable of tested friends …
NZCA Lines: Pure Luxury review – dancefloor first-aid for dystopian times Summary: Michael Lovett is a British indie disco eminence grise. A touring member of Metronomy, he played on Christine and the Queens’ first album; he’s also s …
From ice queen to hothead: how Cate Blanchett negotiated stardom on her own terms There are actors who leave you transfixed because of the sheer wattage of their star power, and actors who can suck you in so completely that you forg …
A White, White Day review – a tender Icelandic thriller In rural Iceland, a boulder tumbles down a hillside and over a cliff, sinking slowly to the bottom of the ocean. The camera spends an eerie 60 seconds …
Earl Cameron obituary Summary: The long career of the actor Earl Cameron, who has died aged 102, mirrored changes in both British cinema and society. His debut, playing a West India …
Dream Wife: So When You Gonna... review – a punk band that still sounds like one Dream Wife are a very modern rock band: they sing about queer love, miscarriage and misogyny; they work with an all-female recording team; and they ha …
Tom Hanks on surviving coronavirus: 'I had crippling body aches, fatigue and couldn't concentrate' “Welcome to the future, Hadley!” Tom Hanks says from my computer screen, as he makes a quick glance to the right of his own to check my name. “Can you …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Detour The lady is a wrecking ball. Has there ever been a performance with the same bite-force per minute of screen time as Ann Savage in the 1945 film noir …
How a new wave of taboo-busting comedies are tackling abortion There is nothing funny about the pro-choice v anti-abortion culture war that has been intensifying over the past few years, but comedy is proving to b …
Beyoncé, Coachella 2018: a rich tapestry of black cultural excellence If Beyoncé’s fanbase, the Beyhive, is something of a cult, then her live performances are their holy pilgrimage. Although I had been on three previous …
Ennio Morricone: a composer with a thrilling ability to hit the emotional jugular Summary: The film industry has its elite squad of composers who can produce a complete orchestral score at the request of a director – and if necessary conduct …
Ennio Morricone obituary Summary: If ever a name was synonymous with movie soundtracks, it was Ennio Morricone. Although it took the Hollywood film industry until 2007 to reward Morric …
Hollywood stars to be exempt from UK's coronavirus quarantine rules The government has announced that major Hollywood stars, including Tom Cruise, will be exempt from quarantine regulations as part of its drive to get …
Ryan Adams apologises for his 'mistreatment' of friends and colleagues Ryan Adams has apologised for “the ways I’ve mistreated people throughout my life and career” in a statement published on the Daily Mail’s website. Ad …
Kasabian frontman Tom Meighan quits band Tom Meighan has announced that he is leaving Kasabian, the Leicester rock band he co-founded as a student in the late 90s. The band shared a brief sta …
Ennio Morricone: 10 of his greatest compositions Summary: Trying to sum up the maestro’s 66-year career into ten tracks is impossible. His work was simply too diverse to be comprehensively boiled down into a …
How the Isley Brothers made Harvest for the World Ernie Isley, songwriter, drums, guitar As a songwriter, inspiration can strike at any time. I’d just bought a new 12-string acoustic guitar and took i …
Greyhound review – Tom Hanks goes to war on the high seas Tom Hanks has often found that the military or quasi-military uniform of a much-loved authority figure rather suits him: that sensitive, faintly rheum …
Gina Prince-Bythewood: 'Films about black women are the hardest to get made' Summary: The Old Guard might be Gina Prince-Bythewood’s first foray into the action genre proper, but the writer-director has always been a fighter of sorts. S …
Empathy machines: what will happen when robots learn to write film scripts? A few years ago I moved to San Francisco, and almost everybody I met there immediately told me they were working on a startup. These startups all had …
Joni Mitchell, Isle of Wight 1970: the day the music nearly died The last days of August on the Isle of Wight, the weather fair, the island relishing the height of summer holiday season. If there was trepidation amo …
Halle Berry drops out of trans role after protests over misgendering Halle Berry has dropped out of playing a trans character after online disquiet following an interview in which she discussed the role. Berry posted a …
My favourite film aged 12: Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels When I was 12, all that mattered was the certificate. That little coloured shape in the bottom corner of the video box was the be-all and end-all, and …
Bumi Thomas: the Glasgow-born singer given two weeks to leave the country During lockdown, UK jazz artist Bumi Thomas has found space to spread out in her local park. “I take my guitar and howl,” she laughs. “I love it!” As …
Johnny Depp libel trial: one-word answers pepper eerily desolate proceedings Wedged uncomfortably into a narrow witness box beneath a row of multi-coloured box files crammed with contradictory statements, Johnny Depp did not oc …
Relic: Australian director Natalie Erika James on dementia, horror and her Sundance hit There’s something particularly horrific about watching a person you love gradually lose all semblance of themselves. In the psychological horror film …
Palm Springs review – goofy time-loop romcom recycles reckless pleasures Throughout this confounding and unsettling time, trapped indoors as a deadly pandemic rages, many of us have found ourselves compulsively and eerily g …
Sonic Youth, Desolation Center 1985: 500 tabs of acid, one life-changing gig In 1983, 20-year-old promoter Stuart Swezey was sick of his gigs getting shut down by Los Angeles cops. On a road trip across Mexico he had an epiphan …
'The fury pours from the screen': the Windrush Betrayal film made in lockdown Normally, newspaper articles have a very short shelf life – quickly read on the day of publication and subsequently either entirely forgotten or left …
Kanye West takes anti-vaccine, anti-abortion stance in US presidential bid Kanye West has given more details about the policy platform he will adopt in his bid to become US president in November, declaring himself anti-aborti …
Litigante review – tender tale of private lives and public scandal There’s enormous tenderness in this drama of disillusion from Colombian director Franco Lolli – but also an overwhelmingly unsentimental sense of life …
Johnny Mandel obituary A brief survey of the career highlights of Johnny Mandel, who has died aged 94, might pick out his composition of the song Suicide Is Painless, the th …
Spaceship Earth review – 90s Arizona eco-experiment looks like reality TV If ever a documentary was in tune with the spirit of lockdown it is this very absorbing film about Biosphere 2 – a colossal eco-experimental project i …
Ja Ja Ding Dong! How schlager found its joyful place in the pop camp Summary: At the beginning of the new Netflix movie Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga, aspiring musicians Lars (Will Ferrell) and Sigrit (Rachel M …
Brahms: where to start with his music This series began last week with Beethoven. Among the composers who took up the daunting challenge of the symphonic form, none was more aware of the l …
No flip-flops, no hoodies: was Jess Glynne wrong to complain about Sexy Fish's dress code? Name: Sexy Fish. Age: Four. Appearance: Very smart indeed. Now, when you say Sexy Fish … I mean the London restaurant Sexy Fish, not the abstract conc …
Finding the Way Back review – Ben Affleck redemption drama is far from a slam dunk Summary: A clunking underdog/redemption sports movie with a horribly perfunctory and unconvincing script, and a ponderous, half-awake performance from the bear …
Dermot Mulroney: 'I remember Charlie Sheen climbing over a balcony, half-clothed …' Summary: In a quiet corner of his Los Angeles home, Dermot Mulroney grapples with a question that many actors’ egos would not allow them to entertain: why isn’ …
Bloody Nose, Empty Pockets: the story of the drunkest film of the year In vino veritas, goes the old proverb, but the truth about truth is that it can come from any sort of alcohol. At The Roaring 20s, the Vegas dive bar …
Above Suspicion review – stranger than fiction weirdness of FBI murder Summary: In 1989, the high-flying FBI officer Mark Putnam became a gruesome footnote in bureau history by killing the informant with whom he was having an affa …
'I never hit Amber': what Johnny Depp said about abuse allegations Summary: In his witness statements, Johnny Depp addressed claims and counter-claims of violence arising from his relationship with Amber Heard. Here are some o …
John King obituary In 1965, my friend and colleague John King, who has died aged 77, co-founded with the distinguished baroque trumpeter Don Smithers the Oxford Pro Musi …
Love Sarah review – Celia Imrie stars in warm-hearted Notting Hill drama A pastry chef called Sarah is knocked off her bike and killed on the way to picking up keys for the bakery in Notting Hill that she’s always dreamed o …
Charlize Theron's 20 best film roles – ranked! 20. The Road (2009) In this disturbing story of a father and son making their way across a post-apocalyptic America, Charlize Theron appears in flashb …
The Streets: None of Us Are Getting Out of This Life Alive review – from lad to dad Cast your mind back to the summer of 2004. Mike Skinner – that then-rarest of things, a British rapper who had found not only a uniquely British voice …
Zara McFarlane's dream festival: Koffee and herbal tea Location It would have to be in Jamaica, but not on the beach as people might expect. I’m thinking of a hillside, country spot, with a winding river y …
Unraveling Athena  review – a frank serving of women's lives in tennis Some sports documentaries use their subject as a portal into another world or as a basis to talk about a broader issue, such as race, class or gender. …
Solitude review – loneliness or reverie? Intense songs with lockdown resonance Summary: Four kinds of solitude are here explored by the tenor James Gilchrist and pianist Anna Tilbrook – and it’s safe to say it carries far greater resonanc …
Our film critic's first drive-in: 'I quietly squeak with excitement' Finally. Finally! After four months of being starved of the big-screen experience, four months of sitting at my desk watching films on my MacBook, fou …
Daniel Barenboim: 'If I could never conduct a live Ring cycle again, I don't know what I would do' It takes more than a global pandemic to stop Daniel Barenboim. The pianist and conductor is not merely one of the modern world’s pre-eminent musicians …
Alex Cox's dream festival: Coppola, Fellini, Herzog and the 1972 gang The Rt Hon Lord Mayor, Liverpool 1 January 1972 Re Proposed Film Festival Your Excellency, I’m pleased to outline for your consideration this plan for …
Relic review – a film that gorges on the terror of forgetting in a feast of dread Summary: Is Australian director Natalie Erika James’ feature debut a haunted house movie? A psychological drama? A Babadookian “horror as metaphor” using ghoul …
Arkansas review – buddy crime caper with 90s flavour and 70s clobber Clark Duke was best known as a peripheral member of that Superbad crew of gauchely charming leading men, along with the likes of Michael Cera and Jona …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham Summary: Clocking in at three and a half hours long, Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham is a remarkably swift Bollywood experience. In fact, the 2001 film could be seen …
Sam Neill: 'Twitter has become toxic. We don't need someone else shouting' Unusually in this year of shuttered cinemas, Sam Neill is the star of a No 1 box-office smash. The film in question, Jurassic Park, was first released …
Donna Missal: Lighter review – progressive torch singer sounds strangely retro New Jersey singer-songwriter Donna Missal has supported both King Princess and Lewis Capaldi on tour, and fans of both will find something to enjoy in …
I Am Vengeance: Retaliation review – Stu Bennett cries foul and tackles Vinnie Jones John Gold is back – all 6ft 7in of him. After making his debut in 2018’s I Am Vengeance, the mild-mannered ex-forces hardman played by former WWE wres …
From Easy Rider to Sightseers: 10 of the best road trip movies Easy Rider The freedom of the open road, far from social, moral and economic strictures, is at the heart of the road movie, a theme it borrowed from t …
Finally, a major Hollywood franchise movie with a gay romance Pop quiz: name the big-budget Hollywood blockbuster released in the last decade that featured blink-and-you’ll-miss-it LGBT representation that was no …
Will the Snyder Cut of Justice League be any better than Joss Whedon's original? It took almost two decades for people outside Europe to be treated to a four-hour edit of Sergio Leone’s final masterpiece, Once Upon a Time in Americ …
Lady Antebellum sue black singer Lady A over name change The US country group Lady A – known until recently as Lady Antebellum, before changing their name to shed its slavery-era connotations – is suing the …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Big Boi, the Chicks, Kanye West Big Boi & Sleepy Brown Can’t Sleep Smoove. And I use the term advisedly, because this sounds like Trevor Nelson’s record of the week from 2003. A simp …
Amy Winehouse, Glastonbury 2004: coaxing rainbows from the clouds It was Glastonbury, so it was raining. It wasn’t the deluge of the day before, which had reduced the main field to a mud bath for Paul McCartney’s hea …
Pop Smoke: five arrested in connection with Brooklyn rapper's killing Summary: Five people have been arrested in connection with the death of Brooklyn rapper Pop Smoke. The 20-year-old artist, born Bashar Jackson, was shot dead i …
John Poole obituary My husband, John Poole, who has died aged 86, was director of the BBC Singers for nearly 20 years. Under his leadership they earned a reputation as on …
Johnny Depp denies hurling phone at Amber Heard during breakup Johnny Depp has denied hurling a phone at Amber Heard in the final confrontation of their turbulent marriage. Details of the alleged incident in their …
Eminem criticises non-mask wearers on new rap track Summary: Eminem has entered the debate about face masks in a collaboration with Kid Cudi, tackling an issue that is the subject of fierce disagreement in the U …
Paul Weller joins Lennon and McCartney with No 1 albums in five straight decades Paul Weller has joined John Lennon and Paul McCartney as the only artists to top the UK album chart in five consecutive decades. Weller said he was “v …
San Cisco, Mo'Ju, Alex the Astronaut and more: Australian music for isolated times As some states around Australia begin to slowly open back up and Victoria heads back into shutdown, Australia’s arts industry is still largely dormant …
'A self-centered publicity stunt': just how serious is Kanye West's presidential bid? Once the strangest of bedfellows, Kanye West and Donald Trump are now officially rivals. On the Fourth of July, the California-based rapper and entrep …
Streaming: great basketball films to watch after The Last Dance Having skidded far off the rails, a former star basketball player finds renewed purpose in life by coaching a team of bright-eyed young talents: some …
Classical home listening: Voces8, the Hermes Experiment and Llŷr Williams • After Silence by Voces8 (Voces8 Records), directed by Barnaby Smith, wasn’t devised for the state we are in but might well have been. This wide-rang …
One to watch: Oscar Jerome The UK jazz underground is still on pause, with live music venues remaining closed, but a fixture on that once-bubbling scene is 27-year-old Oscar Jer …
The Old Guard review – Charlize Theron has an axe to grind Who wants to live for ever? Not Charlize Theron, evidently. Playing immortal warrior Andy, leader of a covert band of unkillable mercenaries, Theron s …
Callum Au and Claire Martin: Songs and Stories review – Claire Martin in big band shock Considering that she has sung duets with Richard Rodney Bennett, appeared around the world with bands of every shape and size, and with many of today’ …
Jealous Johnny Depp ‘tried to stop Amber Heard sex scenes’, court told Details of sex scenes Amber Heard was to play on screen were kept from her husband, Johnny Depp, court documents have revealed. The Pirates of the Car …
Saint Frances review – wry, tender, taboo-busting drama Reviewing Eliza Hittman’s powerfully understated drama Never Rarely Sometimes Always in this paper recently, I noted that by approaching the urgent su …
The future of film: can cinema survive Covid-19? It’s Saturday lunchtime and I am watching Sonic the Hedgehog in a cinema. It’s fair to say that it wouldn’t have been my first choice of film to break …
Elizabeth Debicki: ‘I’m not interested in being comfortable’ To have everybody on the planet in their own homes, not able to see their friends, and collectively yearning for something – I think it’s very interes …
The Streets: None of Us Are Getting Out of This Life Alive review – a banging return For years, Mike Skinner has been living his best post-superstar life – DJ-ing regularly, raising small Streets. But nearly a decade on from his two 20 …
KiKi Layne: 'It hasn’t hit me yet – I’m going to be Eddie Murphy’s daughter!’ Summary: KiKi Layne, 28, made her film debut as the female lead, Tish, in Barry Jenkins’s acclaimed 2018 drama If Beale Street Could Talk, a story of young lov …
Lianne La Havas: 'It's hard to fit in when you have two heritages' Lianne La Havas arrives on her bike, a sturdy looking affair with a wicker front basket. It’s a June morning in Brockwell Park, south London, and the …
Litigante review - bracing portrait of a Colombian woman on the verge There’s an abrasively realist candour to this Colombian portrait of a woman pushed to the brink by the incremental stresses of her daily life. Silvia …
Rufus Wainwright: Unfollow the Rules review – a return to sumptuous basics After almost a decade working in other fields – most notably on his second opera and a project putting Shakespeare’s sonnets to music – Rufus Wainwrig …
The Chicks: Gaslighter; Margo Price: That's How Rumors Get Started – review Country music – a genre steeped in stories of poverty, perseverance and righteous female ire – has long had a progressive wing. But few artists have p …
Eight go mad in Arizona: how a lockdown experiment went horribly wrong It sounds like a sci-fi movie, or the weirdest series of Big Brother ever. Eight volunteers wearing snazzy red jumpsuits seal themselves into a hi-tec …
Kelly Preston, actor and wife of John Travolta, dies aged 57 from breast cancer Kelly Preston, who appeared in the hit films Jerry Maguire and Twins, has died, her husband, John Travolta, said. She was 57. Travolta said in an Inst …
Ghost at 30: the shock romantic blockbuster that tried to do it all American cinema has never had a star quite like Patrick Swayze, who now seems like a bridge between eras, redefining masculinity after an 80s dominate …
Surrealism and animation? They go together like a lobster telephone You wouldn’t mistake the new Spanish animation Buñuel in the Labyrinth of Turtles for a Pixar movie. Not unless your children enjoy seeing heads rippe …
L7, Reading 1992: riffs, mud fights and a flying bloody tampon It might seem a bit much that the festival moment I wish I’d witnessed was a bloodied tampon being flung into a baying crowd. But, as anyone who has w …
Kelly Preston: a classy actor who graduated from teen-movie roles to darker and funnier parts In some ways, Kelly Preston’s most famous role was the one outside the movies: as John Travolta’s wife. They married in 1991 and became probably the m …
Juice WRLD: Legends Never Die review – patron saint of the melancholy masses Summary: Juice WRLD’s posthumous album opens with the devil closing in. On Conversations, the rapper is avoiding a tête-à-tête with the arch fiend himself, a m …
My streaming gem: why you should watch I Am Jonas In the absence of a proper Pride month this year, I’ve found myself hunting down LGBT cinema more than usual. Living through a time like this – severe …
Johnny Depp tells high court libel case how he lost $650m in earnings Summary: Johnny Depp has told the high court that he lost $650m he made at the height of his Pirates of the Caribbean fame and was left owing $100m in taxes on …
Brandy: ‘Music is my therapy. I don’t know what life would be without it’ When Brandy Norwood was 14 she went to see her idol Whitney Houston in concert. Stuck in the nosebleed seats, she decided to blag her way backstage at …
Peter Goodwin obituary My friend Peter Goodwin, who has died aged 94, was for many years a leading figure in the classical music scene in High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. As …
Johnny Depp told bodyguard that Amber Heard 'cut my finger off' Johnny Depp’s bodyguard has said the actor initially made up an excuse after his wife allegedly severed his finger during a row because victims often …
Father Soldier Son review – intimate Netflix military documentary Summary: There’s a long journey to take in sprawling new Netflix documentary Father Soldier Son, a film that follows an American family for almost a decade thr …
Lewis John Carlino obituary After early success, the writer Lewis John Carlino, who has died aged 88, attracted some criticism for abandoning experimental theatre and moving into …
Amber Heard's claim she had two black eyes was false, high court told Amber Heard asked a US stylist “Can you believe I just did that show with two black eyes?” following a television appearance the night after she was a …
BFI diversity standards 'failing to tackle race discrimination in UK film industry' The British film industry is failing to make significant headway in tackling discrimination against black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) workers bo …
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Womad 1985: the qawwali star invokes rapture Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan’s voice is quite unlike any other. At turns heavy and hulkingly powerful, yet also nimble and pointedly precise, his vocalisatio …
Landless review – Brazilian land-access doc doesn't dig deep enough ‘If you can’t cope with the ants, don’t mess with the anthill.” So goes a slogan chanted by the activists occupying land belonging to a sugarcane proc …
Dreambuilders review – blandly bright family animation Summary: This digimated Danish import might have shifted a modest number of popcorn deals in the days before the coronavirus came to town: it’s bright, derivat …
Ghosts of War review – uneven second world war horror story A gaggle of American soldiers make their way to a fancy French chateau at the end of the second world war. A typical war movie’s motley crew of contra …
Kat and the Band review – unlikely adventures of a wannabe pop mogul This insipid confection about a 17-year-old A-level student who passes herself off as older in order to manage a band she admires is so blandly wholes …
'The nearest to God we get': stars pick the Beethoven work they cherish ‘Breathtaking and indispensible’ Alan Hollinghurst, author Beethoven is a master of compaction and urgency, and more than any other composer he writes …
Masters of Love review – awkward sex and terrible hangovers Summary: There’s energy, empathy and fun in this smart micro-budget movie from writer-director Matt Roberts, making his feature debut. It’s a freewheeling rela …
Fatal Affair review – cheap Netflix thriller plays the same old tune From the company that gave us Secret Obsession and Dangerous Lies comes another Lifetime movie-level “thriller” that pairs two picked-out-of-a-hat gen …
The Portuguese Woman review – elegant, unworldly tale of courtly discontent Rita Azevedo Gomes’s The Portuguese Woman is elegant, mysterious, implacably distant slow cinema, beautiful but opaque, composed on the stately level …
'The world is in a state of turmoil': why time-loop movies resonate in 2020 ‘What would you do if you were stuck in one place and every day was exactly the same and nothing that you did mattered?” This is what Bill Murray’s ch …
Protomartyr: Ultimate Success Today review – predictive texts for a world in chaos Summary: Detroit quartet Protomartyr recorded their fifth album last year. Not, at first sight, the most fascinating piece of information about Ultimate Succes …
Notting Hill Carnival 2020: details announced for online version Summary: Details have been announced for 2020’s Notting Hill Carnival, which will take place online amid the coronavirus pandemic. The event usually attracts m …
Make Up director Claire Oakley: 'I was worried people might think we were making a porno' A few years ago, the writer-director Claire Oakley wrote a script for a short film, based on one of her dreams. “It was just a girl, following another …
Buñuel in the Labyrinth of the Turtles review – animated odyssey Here is an engaging if somewhat demure animation, bordering occasionally on a kind of gentle sentimentality that is inimical to the subject: it’s abou …
Eighth Blackbird: Singing in the Dead of Night review – irresistible, propulsive variations Summary: It’s more than 30 years now since composers, Julia Wolfe, Michael Gordon and David Lang founded the new-music collective Bang on a Can, which through …
Donald Trump has battled to block my film's release for years. Now he has failed Summary: Here in Britain we like to think our journalism is free from control by those with power and money. Sadly that’s not always the case. I have spent yea …
Manchester music venues Gorilla and the Deaf Institute to permanently close Summary: Four celebrated music venues in Manchester and Hull are to close due to financial difficulties brought about by the coronavirus pandemic. In Mancheste …
Judy Dyble obituary Judy Dyble, who has died aged 71, was the first female singer with the English folk-rock pioneers Fairport Convention. She was already singing in nort …
Coalition will boost scheme to attract big movie productions to Australia by $400m In an effort to attract more big studio productions to Australia, the Morrison government will extend the life of its location incentive program by tw …
The Very Excellent Mr Dundee review – Paul Hogan tries to not get cancelled in confused film In his first significant film role in more than a decade, Paul Hogan hobbles back on to screens in The Very Excellent Mr Dundee, looking and behaving …
Malcolm McDowell: 'I have no memory of doing most of my films' Malcolm McDowell was the insolent prince of early-70s cinema, the Liverpool salesman who stormed the establishment’s barricades. You can see him on sc …
Clemency – brilliant, devastating death-row drama Bernadine Williams is an American prison warden who has presided over 12 executions. But, as the 13th looms, like someone in a grim superstitious para …
The Chicks: Gaslighter review – former Dixies dish on divorce The band formerly known as the Dixie Chicks are getting with the programme. Last month, after 30 years in the business, the Texas trio decided to drop …
Shirley Collins: Heart's Ease review – the voice of a benevolent God Heart’s Ease is a wild flower that self-seeds and grows tall alone. The cadences of the phrase also suit Shirley Collins in the present, and there is …
Disappearance at Clifton Hill review – dark tale of childhood trauma A young woman, haunted by her past, gazes thoughtfully out over a dark stretch of water. Suddenly, there is a ripple and someone in a frogman’s outfit …
Eddie Gale, jazz trumpeter and Blue Note star, dies aged 78 Eddie Gale, the free jazz trumpeter with two celebrated albums on the Blue Note label, has died aged 78. His wife confirmed to the New York Times that …
Cruel Intentions review – young love still looks laboured 21 years on In 1999, movie audiences were presented with this shrill twist on Laclos’s Dangerous Liaisons from writer-director Roger Kumble, which inelegantly lab …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Evil, Shirley Collins, Sufjan Stevens Evil A Child Shamed Melding Appalachian roots with wispy cloud rap and crunchy studio glitches, Evil comes over not just as a banjo-twanging pal of Am …
Please, Hollywood, leave Paul Verhoeven's Starship Troopers alone Rumours of a remake of Starship Troopers, Paul Verhoeven’s 1997 incisive satire of American fascism, have abounded for the best part of a decade. The …
Andrea Corr: ‘There was a suggestion of yodelling, but not full yodelling!’ In 2000, the Corrs were unstoppable. The Irish siblings welcomed the millennium performing at the UK’s flagship Dome itself and finally converted thei …
No signs of injury on Amber Heard's face after alleged Johnny Depp row, court hears There were no signs of any marks, scratches, swelling or bruises on Amber Heard’s face in the days immediately after she alleged she was hit by Johnny …
Money, mess and Machiavelli: Johnny Depp libel trial week two roundup Summary: In the second week of the Johnny Depp libel trial, the balance of evidence swung in favour of the Pirates of the Caribbean star. Witnesses called by h …
Opening night of the virtual Proms – archive treasures and a trite mash-up When lockdown began in March and one-by-one the summer music and opera festivals began dropping off the calendar, the self-styled “world’s greatest mu …
Streaming: the best Japanese films Summary: This was supposed to be the month when all eyes would be on Japan, with the presumably lavish festivities for the Tokyo Olympic Games due to kick off …
Classical home listening: a good week for tenor-piano recitals • Six songs to a distant beloved – separated by blue mountain and misty valley – comprise An die ferne Geliebte, usually reckoned the first song cycle …
The Chicks: ‘We were used and abused by everybody who wanted to make money off us’ When the Dixie Chicks signed to Sony in 1995, the label worried that their name was politically incorrect. At the time, the bosses were more concerned …
One to watch: Christian Lee Hutson Some say nostalgia is wasted on the young, but that doesn’t stop it being a good subject for songs. Jackson Browne wrote These Days, the 1967 classic …
On my radar: Moses Boyd on his cultural highlights A breakout star of the new London jazz scene, Moses Boyd was born in Catford, south-east London, in 1991. He started playing drums at 13, and a few ye …
'Our collective imagination could die away': Stewart Lee and Shirley Collins in conversation “I was all right until this week, but now I’ve started swearing at inanimate objects.” Stewart Lee – comedian on lockdown and heavily bearded columnis …
Oumou Sangaré: Acoustic review – when less is magnificently more Unplugged sessions have fallen from favour since their 1990s heyday, but here Mali’s leading diva reminds us that sometimes they can eclipse plugged-i …
Alice Ivy, Tkay Maidza, Paul Kelly and more: Australian music for isolated times As some states around Australia begin to slowly reopen and Victoria slogs it out back in shutdown, Australia’s arts industry is still largely dormant …
Clemency review – Alfre Woodard quietly dazzles in this superb death row drama Amid the many oversights of January’s Oscar nominations, Alfre Woodard’s absence from the best actress shortlist was particularly telling. Having earn …
The Pretenders: Hate for Sale review – every song could be a single Blessed with an evergreen voice and an unimpeachable melodic ear, Chrissie Hynde – the keeper of one of the finer catalogues in rock – has been churni …
Hollywood nervously awaits fallout from explosive Johnny Depp trial Summary: The Hollywood careers of more than just a couple of film stars are in jeopardy this weekend as the extraordinarily dirty legal battle pitting Johnny D …
Buñuel in the Labyrinth of the Turtles review – intriguing animation The career of director Luis Buñuel was very nearly over before it had even begun. The failure of his first feature, L’Age d’Or, a surrealist comedy ma …
Lianne La Havas: Lianne La Havas review – purposeful, tender and bold While Leanne La Havas’s previous albums – 2012’s acoustic-led Is Your Love Big Enough? and 2015’s neo-soul dabbling Blood – had their moments, they ne …
'Our sound engineer got a death threat': how lesbian label Olivia shook up music It’s the kind of smooth soul groove you can imagine hearing on California FM radio in the late 70s. Bright strings dance over sparkling Fender Rhodes …
God, abortion and better acoustics: Kanye West launches campaign with chaotic rally Kanye West has launched his campaign tour for the US presidential election in chaotic fashion at an event in Charleston, South Carolina, delivering a …
'I grew a beard to try to hide in public': Haley Joel Osment on success after child stardom Haley Joel Osment thought he was finished for the day. It was 1998 and the 10-year-old was shooting The Sixth Sense, directed by M Night Shyamalan. Wi …
Emitt Rhodes, influential US psych-pop musician, dies aged 70 Emitt Rhodes, the cult US musician who helped shape the powerpop genre, has died aged 70. His death was confirmed by Tony Blass, who produced a 2009 d …
Amber Heard tells libel trial she feared Johnny Depp would kill her Summary: Amber Heard feared she would be killed by Johnny Depp, who was violent and abusive when high on drink or drugs, a London court has been told. Opening …
Beyoncé unveils trailer for Disney+ visual album Black is King Beyoncé has released a trailer for her new visual album, Black is King, which aims to promote “the beauty of tradition and black excellence”. The film …
Dance music star the Black Madonna changes name due to racial insensitivity The successful American DJ and producer the Black Madonna has changed her name to the Blessed Madonna, following a petition for her to change it on gr …
What can we learn from Netflix's all-time top 10 movies? Summary: Netflix’s once heavily guarded vault of secret statistics has slowly opened up over the last couple of years, a gradual juicy reveal of viewer habits …
Q magazine's demise signals the end of the old music press Summary: It seems a strange comparison to make, but in its initial incarnation at least, Q magazine was as much a product of its era as Oz and the Internationa …
'Completely surreal': Jess Cornelius on releasing an album – and having a baby – at the same time At 12am the night before releasing her new single, Los Angeles-based New Zealand musician Jess Cornelius felt her water break. The baby was coming two …
Strasbourg 1518 review – Jonathan Glazer's cathartic spasm of protest for our times ‘How are you?” are the first audible words in this ferocious and headbuttingly confrontational short film from Jonathan Glazer: the answer can only be …
Nicki Minaj announces she's pregnant with her first child Summary: Nicki Minaj is pregnant with her first child. The rapper posted three images on Instagram, one featuring the caption “#Preggers” and another reading: …
Melbourne international film festival 2020: five things to watch in this year's online program The coronavirus has of course interrupted plans for this year’s Melbourne international film festival, resulting in the event’s first ever online-only …
Chris Frantz: 'If you knew David Byrne, you would not be jealous of him' David Byrne overwhelms the image of Talking Heads. With his herky-jerky mannerisms, loopy persona and arch lyrics – not to mention his command of the …
Tiwa Savage: the Nigerian pop star fighting the country's rape crisis Summary: In the quest to find a perfect spot for her router, Tiwa Savage has to disrupt her four-year-old son Jamil’s TV time. He puts up a mild protest but so …
Blooms with a view: Derek Jarman's magical garden gets a transplant When the director and artist Derek Jarman began making his garden on the great shingle expanse outside his cottage in Dungeness, local fishermen feare …
'It had that spiky sense of humour': your memories of Q magazine The closure of music magazine Q has been described as signalling the final passing of the industry’s traditional press, as the coronavirus pandemic co …
Garbancito, hero of Europe’s first feature-length animated colour film, to fight again Summary: Seventy-five years after he first sallied forth to fight giants, dwarves and witches armed only with an unwavering sense of piety, a magic sword and a …
Babyteeth review – Eliza Scanlen stars in a shattering, refreshing and achey coming-of-age film A crack of sunlight streams through a window, casting a teenage girl’s face half in darkness. The mood is reflective, the girl’s eyes full of emotions …
As Tenet is delayed yet again, is it time to end cinema's 'America first' policy? Growing up in the 1980s, there was always one classmate who would go to the US for the summer holidays and come back raving about new movies such as E …
Sing into the funnel please: inside the Covid-19 lab hoping to declare singing safe Declan Costello, an ear, nose and throat surgeon with an interest in voice disorders and a side career as a tenor, is looking back on the year. “Six m …
Goran Bregović, Guča 2007: 100,000 people in Balkan brass ecstasy A small town in the rolling hills of central Serbia is an unlikely setting for one of Europe’s wildest music festivals, but across five days in early …
Stravinsky: where to start with his music Of the composers who spearheaded modernism in music at the beginning of the 20th century, it has been Igor Stravinsky (1882-1971) whose influence has …
Tim Smith, frontman of cult band Cardiacs, dies aged 59 Tim Smith, frontman with cult British band Cardiacs, has died aged 59. The news was confirmed by his bandmate Kavus Torabi. Another band representativ …
Once There Was Brasília review – sci-fi odyssey into Brazil's murky politics Brazilian director Adirley Queirós here cobbles together something comparable, though far more lo-fi, to Wong Kar-wai’s 2046: a haunted, backwards-loo …
Annie Ross, British-American jazz singer and actor, dies aged 89 Summary: Annie Ross, the British singer who became globally famous with jazz vocal trio Lambert, Hendricks & Ross and had a varied acting career, has died aged …
Alice review – sex-worker drama fails to sell its preposterous premise This debut feature from Australian director Josephine Mackerras was a success at last year’s SXSW festival; it is well acted and all hangs together in …
Cardiacs' Tim Smith: a one-man subculture who inspired total devotion If Tim Smith influenced you, he really influenced you. His legacy following his death aged 59 might be small in the wider realm of pop, but for many o …
Kim Kardashian requests compassion for Kanye West's bipolar disorder Kim Kardashian West has spoken for the first time about her husband Kanye West’s bipolar disorder after he posted and deleted a string of erratic twee …
The Good Girls review – a high-class skewering of Mexican decadence There is enormous clarity and control in this film from Mexican director Alejandra Márquez Abella, and a tremendous lead performance from Ilse Salas. …
Amber Heard said Johnny Depp tried to suffocate her with pillow, court told Summary: Amber Heard had a cut lip and bruises that she said had been inflicted by Johnny Depp, who she said had tried to suffocate her with a pillow, Heard’s …
Stage Mother review – drag-queen heartwarmer never rises above tepid There’s something hectoring, mawkish and underpowered about Stage Mother. Jacki Weaver plays Maybelline, a small-town Texan housewife who is the choir …
Mercury prize 2020: where are the albums dragged from the fringes? The Mercury music prize has caused controversy before – over everything from representation to Slowthai appearing on stage brandishing an effigy of Bo …
Mercury prize 2020: Stormzy, Dua Lipa and Michael Kiwanuka among nominees Summary: Stormzy, Dua Lipa, Laura Marling and Michael Kiwanuka are among the artists competing for 2020’s Mercury prize, arguably the most prestigious award in …
Jim Carrey's 20 best film performances – ranked! Summary: 20. The Number 23 (2007) By and large, Jim Carrey either makes good films or very, very bad films. The latter includes mush such as The Majestic, come …
Jessy Lanza: All the Time review – a bright star in pop's outer galaxies Last week, Jessy Lanza livestreamed a performance-slash-DJ set. Nothing unusual in that, of course. You currently can’t move for artists, producers an …
Spy Intervention review – a film without a quantum of solace It’s long been a complaint that all the big awards go to tragic dramas, while comedy, especially farce, is much harder to pull off. Nothing illustrate …
Taylor Swift announces surprise album, Folklore, with the National and Bon Iver Taylor Swift has announced the surprise release of her eighth album, Folklore. The Grammy-winning songwriter produced and co-wrote much of the album a …
Has Terrordome's time come? How a black British film found its moment Reissues and revivals are not uncommon in cinema, but it is not often that a film has the chance of a total critical makeover. That seems to be what i …
Elton John’s ex-wife tells court she changed identity to shed ties to singer Sir Elton John’s ex-wife Renate Blauel adopted a new identity and went into hiding in a British village in an attempt to shed her connection to the si …
Nick Cave: Idiot Prayer review – livestreamed gig is not just solo, but starkly alone In pre-pandemic times, a concert such as Nick Cave’s Idiot Prayer would have been called a solo show. Not so this one, filmed by Oscar-nominated cinem …
Alanis Morissette: 'Without therapy, I don't think I'd still be here' In the video for her new single, Reasons I Drink, Alanis Morissette appears in a group addiction meeting. The song, set to stabbing piano, traces the …
Jacki Weaver: 'Michael Powell said I was headed for great things. He didn't tell me it would take 50 years' Jacki Weaver is thinking about how her life has changed. “To find yourself in bed with Robert De Niro is an extraordinary thing for a woman of my age, …
The Rifleman review – Latvian war epic aims high The Rifleman is the top-grossing film of all time at the Latvian box office and if you had to guess at the kind of film that would inspire such nation …
Mel Gibson was hospitalised with coronavirus in April The actor Mel Gibson spent a week in hospital after contracting coronavirus earlier this year, his representatives have confirmed. Speaking to the Dai …
Maria Schneider Orchestra: Data Lords review – digital dystopia in jazz When Maria Schneider led her long-running jazz orchestra in a 2015 London performance of that year’s release The Thompson Fields, the great American c …
Kamaal Williams: Wu Hen review – jazz-soul revivalist's fitful return Summary: Coming to prominence in 2016 as one half of jazz duo Yussef Kamaal, producer and pianist Kamaal Williams spearheaded the London-based revival of the g …
‘Please don’t take my man’: Dolly Parton and Jolene’s enduring legacy Of the quirkiest pop tropes, such as saying hello from the other side, being the baaaad guy and, of course, there being absolutely no party like an S …
Wiley posts antisemitic tweets, likening Jews to Ku Klux Klan Wiley, the chart-topping grime rapper and producer, has made antisemitic comments on Twitter, including a statement that places Jews alongside the Ku …
Why is Marvel taking its sweet time over Deadpool 3? In the two years since Deadpool 2 was released, it seems the entire world has changed out of all recognition. Hollywood, too. The biggest change in Ti …
English music venues to receive £2.25m in emergency pandemic aid Culture secretary Oliver Dowden has announced plans to save around 150 grassroots music venues from insolvency while cashflow is limited for venues sh …
Fontaines DC: ‘There’s the great lie of the rock star who doesn’t care what people think’ You tend to know what to expect from the blurb that accompanies a band’s new album. There will almost certainly be talk of a “journey” or an “evolutio …
Streaming: the Barbican's new Cinema on Demand After four long months of home entertainment under lockdown, any new streaming service, big or boutique, feels like a treat to be seized upon. However …
Dressed to Kill at 40: Brian De Palma's thrilling yet problematic shocker The distance between Brian De Palma’s Dressed to Kill and its source of inspiration, Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho, is 20 years. The distance between Dres …
Classical home listening: Mozart, mambo, Miss Julie and more Summary: • Cuban musicians have an ability to switch from classical to jazz to salsa with a chameleon versatility the rest of us can only envy. No boundaries, …
Police investigate grime artist Wiley's antisemitic tweets Police are investigating after the grime artist Wiley posted a tirade of antisemitic comments on Twitter and Instagram. The musician has been dropped …
Idiot Prayer: Nick Cave Alone at Alexandra Palace review – utterly magnetic A few weeks ago, in the vast, empty expanse of the West Hall in London’s Alexandra Palace, Nick Cave sat alone at a piano and sang 21 songs from acros …
Star treatment for Depp trial branded ‘galling’ by lawyers amid huge backlog Johnny Depp’s libel trial has been described as “galling” by lawyers at a time when the criminal justice system is struggling with a massive backlog, …
Stage Mother review – feelgood drag film falls flat Jacki Weaver’s Maybelline Metcalf is a tough Texan mama bear and director of her small-town church choir, a fine fit for the Australian actor’s natura …
Peter Green: Fleetwood Mac co-founder dies aged 73 Tributes have been paid to Fleetwood Mac co-founder Peter Green after he died “peacefully in his sleep” aged 73. A statement from Swan Turton solicito …
Peter Green: Fleetwood Mac founder and guitar hero of the British blues scene Summary: Peter Green, who has died at the age of 73, was one of the great heroes, and great casualties, of the British blues scene, back in its glory days in t …
Peter Green: guitar pioneer who made the blues his own The occasion was as unlikely as it was unforgettable: Peter Green playing in Frome, Somerset, 10 years ago, but feels like yesterday. Peter Green, who …
Trolls, tweets and famous friends: the vicious PR war between Johnny Depp and Amber Heard By now those who actually wished to follow the libel war being waged by Johnny Depp against the Sun newspaper will know exactly who is said to have th …
How to Build a Girl review – enjoyably rough-and-ready Summary: “What do you do when you build yourself, only to realise that you built yourself with the wrong things?” That’s the question at the heart of this ente …
Jessy Lanza: All the Time review – witching-hour jams Summary: Should you ever find yourself pondering what sort of music ghosts play in the wine bars of the underworld, fret not, for Canadian producer Jessy Lanza …
The week in classical: BBC Proms 2020 and more – review With brave face and make-do cheer, the BBC Proms 2020 launched its 125th anniversary year last weekend: not in its usual Royal Albert Hall home with a …
James Dean Bradfield: 'I'm not sure musicians telling people who to vote for helps' James Dean Bradfield was born in 1969, and brought up in the south Wales valleys. He formed the Manic Street Preachers at school in 1986 with friends …
Kamaal Williams: Wu Hen review – genre-bending prodigy strikes again Street Dreams is the opening track of the second solo album from London keysman Kamaal Williams, and it could easily be the concept for the entire thi …
Peter Green obituary Peter Green, who has died aged 73, was one of the guitar-playing greats of 1960s blues-rock as well as a gifted songwriter. He was a founder of Fleetw …
Olivia de Havilland: what it's like working for a Hollywood legend It is 2011 and I am a student in Paris, teaching English for a year and renting a small flat only two metro stops from Olivia de Havilland’s residence …
Dame Olivia de Havilland obituary Dame Olivia de Havilland, who has died aged 104, was one of the last surviving cast members of Gone With the Wind (1939). Her portrayal of the saintly …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Happy as Lazzaro Summary: The Italian hills have never looked less bucolic than in this strange, melancholy film. The terrain is harsh and unyielding; the sun unrelenting; the …
Kraftwerk, Tribal Gathering 1997: past, present and future become one One night in 1997, in the grounds of a country house just off the M1, I watched Kraftwerk, the enigmatic Mensch-Maschine, successfully evolve. Their a …
Johnny Depp's anger based on 'deep misogyny', court told A “deep misogyny” lay at the root of the anger that Johnny Depp translated into violence – fuelled by an addiction to alcohol and drugs – against his …
Mike Scott of the Waterboys: how we made The Whole of the Moon Summary: Mike Scott, singer-songwriter I was in Manhattan with my girlfriend, Krista. She asked: “Is it easy to write songs?” In my 20s I hadn’t yet grown out …
Annie Ross obituary The jazz singer Annie Ross, who has died aged 89, consistently brought the best out of good songs – and sometimes the best out of her expert admirers, …
Denise Johnson, singer with Primal Scream, dies aged 56 Summary: Denise Johnson, the Manchester-born singer best known for her vocals on Primal Scream’s 1991 album Screamadelica, has died aged 56. A friend of Johnso …
Christopher Nolan's Tenet to be released in August – but not in the US Warner Bros has announced that Christopher Nolan’s much-anticipated sci-fi thriller Tenet will be released in international markets before the US. An …
'We just keep fighting': behind an urgent, inspiring film about the ACLU If there was ever any doubt that Donald Trump would cement a campaign heralded by calling Mexicans rapists into policy, it was dispelled on 27 January …
Drake beats Madonna's record for most US Top 10 hits Drake has beaten Madonna’s record for the highest number of Top 10 hits in US chart history. The Canadian rapper has two tracks in this week’s chart i …
Ronald Bergan obituary Summary: The film scholar Ronald Bergan, who has died aged 82 after suffering from urosepsis, wrote a number of biographies that revealed a considerable unders …
'She gold-plated songs': Denise Johnson, the voice of Manchester's dancefloors Summary: Manchester’s nostalgia industrial complex tends to privilege its white men: Joy Division and Tony Wilson are the ones to have had biopics made about t …
'Keep the dist-dance': Design Museum reopens with electronic music exhibition With the sour tang of dry ice, pounding dance music and more strobe lights in one room than are normally on the main stage of Glastonbury it may final …
Depp libel trial reveals problems of proof in domestic violence cases Despite being a libel case, Depp v News Group Newspapers Ltd & Another felt more like a criminal trial at the Old Bailey, or a domestic violence heari …
Amber Heard 'placing faith in justice' as Depp lawyer calls her an abuser Amber Heard has spoken of her trauma at reliving the breakup of her marriage, saying she is “placing her faith in British justice” as Johnny Depp’s la …
Wiley's Facebook and Instagram accounts deactivated after antisemitic remarks Facebook has announced that it has deactivated Wiley’s Facebook and Instagram accounts, after the grime MC posted a series of antisemitic comments on …
UK pledges £500m insurance fund to jumpstart film and TV production A £500m scheme to jumpstart the UK’s battered film and television industries has been welcomed by producers. On Tuesday, the culture secretary, Oliver …
Nina Simone, Montreux Jazz 1976: a difficult, unsteady return to the limelight The enduring image of Nina Simone is one of a sharp, radical, no-nonsense artist. But on stage at the Montreux Jazz festival in 1976, dressed in a for …
Madonna's Instagram flagged for spreading coronavirus misinformation Instagram has deleted a post by Madonna in which the pop star shared a coronavirus conspiracy theory with her 15 million followers. She captioned the …
Lockdown listening: classical music and opera to stream at home Operas and concerts on demand • The Barbican’s 2013 multimedia staging of Britten’s Curlew River in St Giles’ Cripplegate is available to stream until …
Last and First Men review – eerie sounds and unearthly images from a posthuman world Summary: Two years after the death of the Icelandic film composer Jóhann Jóhannsson, his only movie as director has become available in the UK on streaming pla …
British-Japanese pop star Rina Sawayama 'ineligible' for Mercury prize The British-Japanese pop star Rina Sawayama has expressed her frustration that her debut album was ineligible for this year’s Mercury prize because sh …
Bill Davies obituary Summary: My friend and former teacher Bill Davies, who has died aged 83, was a well-known south Wales trumpeter. A founder member of the Constellation Big Band …
Boys State: what happens when 1,000 high-school boys run a government? In the summer of 2018, as the midterms heated up and the Trump administration made a national flashpoint out of America’s southern border, over a thou …
100% Wolf review – werepoodle is more fluff than stuff Summary: More like 92% generic. This decent Australian family animation, about a werewolf boy who transforms into a fluffy poodle instead of a ferocious hound, …
#MeToo and pin badges: how Tomboy beat the odds at South Korea's box office Summary: Tomboy, the second film by Portrait of a Lady on Fire director Céline Sciamma, premiered at the Berlin film festival almost a decade ago in 2011. Foll …
As a singer in the Covid era, it's hard to accept that something I love so dearly could be deadly On the last weekend before Sydney went into lockdown in March, I was in the City Recital Hall performing Handel’s Messiah. The half empty hall gave th …
Wiley refuses to withdraw antisemitic Twitter comments Wiley has refused to distance himself from antisemitic comments he posted on social media, after the grime artist found himself banned from both Twitt …
Unhinged review – Russell Crowe powers up for gonzo road-rage violence Russell Crowe finds his beefiest, growliest, jowliest form in this gonzo road-rage thriller, with some nasty and extraneous stabs of violence. The tit …
Summerland review – Gemma Arterton war drama warms the cockles Strong on lush cinematography, period knitwear and sincerity, but less effective in terms of historical plausibility, the mostly second world war-set …
Around the Sun review – madly meta multiple worlds romance Shot a few years ago in Normandy and shown at a few small film festivals back in the Before Times of 2019, this intimate and yet deliciously cerebral …
Jane Parker-Smith obituary The organist Jane Parker-Smith, who has died suddenly aged 70, possessed an exceptional technique, vibrant musicality and a vivacious stage presence. …
Make Up review – wintry chills in a spooky seaside thriller The out-of-season holiday resort, like the abandoned city or ruined temple, has something fascinating and even erotic in its emptiness. Writer-directo …
AC/DC – their 40 greatest songs, ranked! 40. Soul Stripper (1975) In their infancy, AC/DC weren’t tied to one style. Their first Australian album even featured this intriguing example of a ki …
Toronto film festival announces line-up with Mark Wahlberg drama premiering The Toronto film festival has announced its main line-up for this year, although it still uncertain whether physical screenings will take place. As wi …
Rachmaninov: Preludes, Études-Tableaux, etc review – refined, fluent playing The Armenian-American pianist Sergei Babayan makes his solo debut on Deutsche Grammophon with this Rachmaninov recital. Born in 1961, he’s hardly a ne …
Waterworld: is Kevin Costner's damp squib a cult classic in the making? When looking back at the most infamous films of the 1990s – Batman & Robin, Judge Dredd and Star Wars: The Phantom Menace spring to mind – it’s easy t …
Swabs, masks, action! Film-making through a pandemic “You get used to sticking a six-inch cotton-wool bud up your nose and down your tonsils every morning,” says Richard Clark. He is describing his typic …
Shakuntala Devi review – spirited biopic of a mathematical genius In recent years, the Hindi film mainstream has become more proactive about telling the stories of notable women. This new one follows on the heels of …
Headie One: 'In prison, the only thing not taken away from you is yourself' The north London district of Tottenham seems to offer up a rap icon for every generation. Hip-hop group Demon Boyz were among the first to shed Americ …
The Fight review – a walk-and-talk with the activists tackling Trump The title is apt for a documentary about the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), who got their always combative existence stepped up a notch with t …
Host review – surprisingly effective Zoom-based horror When it comes to films and shows made during the global pandemic, there’s a fine line between ingenuity and desperation. We’re all still trapped in so …
Brave new worlds: what can we learn from film's utopian visions? As we emerge blinking into the sunlight after lockdown, many of us will be daring to dream of a more harmonious, ecological future. It’s what the subj …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Coherence Summary: It’s a fearful thought for fans of jagged-edged futurism, but Netflix’s Black Mirror might be just one of those things that never quite becomes part o …
Duma: Duma review – extreme Kenyan metalheads bring doom to the dancefloor Alongside the burgeoning experimental electronic scene in east Africa is a small but committed underground of metal bands, based in Nairobi. These gro …
Dominic Fike: What Could Possibly Go Wrong review – Gen Z star surfs genres Few young artists can boast of sparking a label bidding war after releasing their debut EP through Soundcloud, or list the likes of Brockhampton, Bill …
'I find myself spiralling': the crisis facing British music venues Live music is in crisis. With no gigs since lockdown began on 23 March, most venues have seen their income drop to almost zero. The live music industr …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Yungblud, Beabadoobee, Idles Yungblud Strawberry Lipstick The personification of Gen Z screaming in your face during an all-nighter on lighter fluid, Yungblud is basically Keith F …
Flash Gordon review – bizarre expressionist superhero panto Summary: ‘This place is a lunatic asylum!” says the square-jawed, peroxide-blond hero of Mike Hodges’ bizarre LSD pantomime Flash Gordon, adapted by Lorenzo Se …
Jay Baruchel's fantasy festival: deep-diving into The Crow with Ian Curtis and Oreos Format Sometimes Just Sometimes Fest is a multimedia fortnight built around one of my favourite movies, The Crow. The spectre of tragedy looms over th …
Black Is King review – Beyoncé’s love song to the black diaspora Summary: Beyoncé’s second visual album after Lemonade is truly worth the wait. An accompaniment to her Lion King album The Gift, to describe Black Is King as j …
From arts-and-crafts to trippy animation: how pop videos have evolved during lockdown Summary: When lockdown was first announced, the world’s thoughts turned, of course, to music videos. How would artists create eye-tickling delights if camera o …
Inception review – the virtual reinvention of virtual reality With Christopher Nolan’s new film Tenet doomed to arrive like Achilles racing the tortoise in Zeno’s paradox, approaching and approaching, forever clo …
Alan Parker, director of Midnight Express and Bugsy Malone, dies aged 76 Alan Parker, the British director behind a string of hits including Midnight Express, Bugsy Malone, and The Commitments, has died aged 76. The news wa …
Alan Parker: a maker of glorious films with a gift for connecting with audiences Alan Parker was a great storyteller of the movies, a muscular film-maker who cared about what the public wanted, cared about how to get the public int …
Fyre sale: US marshals auction off seized merchandise from ill-fated festival You’ve seen the Fyre Festival documentaries, read about the lawsuits, and laughed at the viral sandwich tweet – and now you can bid on the ill-fated e …
Baftas reward diversity and longevity in a post-Covid era Summary: “No one’s stronger than an artist in a crisis”: so sang Tim Minchin in a satirical number to open the 2020 Bafta television awards, which took place o …
Streaming: enjoy Sundance London from your sofa In a year that has seen the usually crammed film festival circuit thrown into disarray by coronavirus, January’s Sundance film festival was one of the …
Classical home listening: Beethoven, John Sheppard – and Komitas • Suffering from Beethoven anniversary fatigue? The British pianist Paul Lewis has the ideal tonic. His album Für Elise: Bagatelles, Opp 33, 119 & 126 …
One to watch: Billy Nomates There is currently no shortage of post-punk acts with a line in confrontational Sprechgesang. Brighton band Squid’s is absurdist and yelping. Dublin’s …
Taylor Swift: Folklore review – love and loss in lockdown Taylor Swift’s surprise eighth album, Folklore, takes 16 complex and intriguing tunes by pop’s reigning colossus and gussies them up in atmospherics a …
Unhinged review – darkly funny tale of road rage Stuck in standstill traffic, single mum Rachel (the sparky Caren Pistorius) is late dropping her son, Kyle (Gabriel Bateman), at school and on the ver …
Andrew Oliver: No Local Stops review – a masterclass in early jazz piano If anyone is going to succeed in rescuing good music from the ghetto called “early jazz”, it will be the pianist Andrew Oliver. I wouldn’t go so far a …
Fontaines DC: A Hero’s Death review – sneer all you like Fontaines DC insist that A Hero’s Death is not merely “part two” to their phenomenal debut album, Dogrel (2019) and that the band “don’t belong to any …
Summerland review – wartime wonderment with Gemma Arterton What a lovely, hopeful and rather magical movie this is. The feature debut from writer/director Jessica Swale, whose impressive theatre CV includes th …
Lana Del Rey: Violet Bent Backwards over the Grass review – poetry debut with mixed results Summary: This being Lana Del Rey, the title track of her poetry-audiobook-with-music suggests some sordid gymnastics at a garden party. Not so: the image captu …
Make Up review – an eerie erotic awakening in a caravan park British writer-director Claire Oakley’s striking feature debut transforms an off-season caravan park in Cornwall into a haunting hall of mirrors. Eigh …
Boys State review – amazing study of teenagers running for pretend office It’s not clear to me if this is a heartwarming study in young people’s idealism or a Lord of the Flies bloodbath with smug feral demons in white T-shi …
Leon Fleisher, US pianist who lost use of his right hand, dies aged 92 Leon Fleisher, whose career as an acclaimed US concert pianist continued despite losing the use of his right hand, has died aged 92. His son Julian sa …
Hardcore pop fans are abusing critics – and putting acclaim before art The album rating system at US publication Pitchfork is one of the most silly and nerdy things in music journalism. The Guardian’s five-star system loo …
Nolan sisters Linda and Anne both being treated for cancer Two of the Nolan Sisters, the Irish group that rose to fame in the 1970s, are being treated for cancer at the same time. Linda and Anne Nolan both beg …
Dan Aykroyd and John Landis: how we made The Blues Brothers Summary: Dan Aykroyd, actor (played Elwood) My original script was called The Return of the Blues Brothers and had two movies in it. John Landis turned it into …
House music: Flora Willson's watching and listening highlights Summary: Maybe it’s the weather, or a body clock now expecting a holiday. I’ve stayed put this week, but while new quarantine rules and local lockdowns continu …
Howard review – the lyricist who made Disney's hits soar There’s something exciting about a film that immerses you in the life of a creative artist, and so it proves with this documentary about Howard Ashman …
My streaming gem: why you should watch I Am Divine The first time I saw John Waters’ film Pink Flamingos – starring Divine as the “filthiest person alive” – I thought two things: I am not alone. And ev …
'The narrative is we don't sell records': the black female singers uncredited by the UK industry Summary: Through soul, funk, disco and beyond, black female vocalists stood proudly on the front of record sleeves and on stages. Then, in 1989, Italian dance …
Sunset Boulevard at 70: we’re all Norma Desmond now On its release in August 1950, Sunset Boulevard punched its own industry in the face. Showbiz royalty, normally enclosed in an echo chamber of self-co …
The Killers tour: serious sexual misconduct claim 'entirely unfounded' Summary: Lawyers for rock band the Killers have said they were “unable to find any corroboration whatsoever” of a report of serious sexual misconduct by the La …
Neil Young sues Donald Trump campaign for using his music Neil Young is suing Donald Trump’s campaign for alleged illegal usage of his music at a rally. The musician claims that Rockin’ in the Free World and …
Leon Fleisher: there's much more to the US pianist's career than tragedy Some may be tempted to describe the career of Leon Fleisher, the American concert pianist who died in Baltimore this week aged 92, as a deeply poignan …
Will the UK ever love foreign-language pop? In 2017, Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee’s huge No 1 summer hit Despacito seemed to herald a new age where the domination of the English language in weste …
Anelka: Misunderstood review – subtle portrait of an enigmatic talent A galaxy of major names – including Thierry Henry, Arsène Wenger and Didier Drogba – line up to chip in their two-penn’orth on one of the great footba …
Mortal review – angsty Norse gods leave you praying for the end Norwegian filmmaker André Øvredal turned Hollywood heads in 2011 with his local folkloric fantasy Troll Hunter. So it must irk him that the definitive …
Throbbing Gristle, ATP 2004: a gateway to a strange other England By the winter of 2004, the Pontins holiday camp at Camber Sands had seen better days. Barely updated since its 1970s heyday, the bleak chalets, roamed …
Echo review – a mesmerising mosaic of Icelandic festivities Don’t waste time looking for a narrative thread or common character in Echo. The third feature from director Rúnar Rúnarsson is a series of single-sho …
Elisar Cabrera obituary My friend Elisar Cabrera, who has died aged 49 of cancer, was a film producer, director, web series pioneer, video journalist and wrestling producer. …
A Thousand Cuts: inside a chilling documentary on Maria Ressa “For years now, I’ve been saying that I feel like Alice falling down the rabbit hole, with talking cards all over saying off with my head.” As her lif …
Sheep and Wolves: Pig Deal review – animated fable is shorn of excitement A hair of the dog that no one ordered, here’s a sequel to the ropey Russian family animation Sheep and Wolves, in which predator and prey learned to l …
Actresses playing actresses in film – ranked! 10. Marlene Dietrich in Stage Fright (1950) A classic role of elegant, sophisticated malice and brazen wrongdoing for Marlene Dietrich as Charlotte In …
The Matrix director: I'm glad film recognised as trans metaphor Lilly Wachowski, who co-directed the Matrix films with her sister, Lana, has confirmed that they should be read as allegories for the transgender narr …
Life With Music review – sparks don't fly between Patrick Stewart and Katie Holmes Patrick Stewart plays a renowned concert pianist named Henry Cole who has become wracked with anxiety about performing in this location-skimming yet c …
Zoe Saldana apologises for playing Nina Simone in controversial biopic Zoe Saldana has apologised for playing Nina Simone in the 2016 biopic Nina, a casting that drew criticism from the late singer’s estate. “I should hav …
Coky Giedroyc’s fantasy festival: a celebration of the 80s in Cornwall with proper cutlery Summary: The vibe I went to film school in the 80s; one of my first shorts was about the women protesting against cruise missiles at the RAF base at Greenham C …
Kathleen Edwards on quitting music, falling for a conman – and her comeback When Kathleen Edwards opened Quitters coffee shop in Stittsville, Ottawa, in late 2014, customers would ask if she was the country singer. Yes, in a m …
Ethel Smyth: The Prison review – symphony for a searching soul Ethel Smyth was unusual among composers in being able to write a work called The Prison from a position of experience, but her weeks in Holloway as a …
Doorstep recitals and bespoke gigs: how classical music is adapting to the new normal Chris North, a keen concertgoer, was only a few minutes away when he heard the news. “I got off the motorbike at the Barbican, ready to walk up to LSO …
Kate Tempest announces they are non-binary, changes name to Kae The musician and poet formerly named Kate Tempest has changed their name to Kae Tempest, and announced they are non-binary. In the announcement on Ins …
Letters: Ronald Bergan obituary When working on these pages, I had a long-running joke – or I think it was a joke – with Ronald Bergan about my filling out a line concerning the acto …
Detail arrested: Grammy-winning producer faces 15 counts of sexual assault The Grammy award-winning music producer Detail was arrested Wednesday on more than a dozen charges of sexual assault, authorities said. The 41-year-ol …
Work It review – engaging Netflix teen comedy dances to a familiar beat There’s an easy sleepover movie charm to Netflix comedy Work It, a charm that’s proved harder to find in their many other teen offerings of late. It’s …
Perfect 10 review – teen drama marks the arrival of a special talent Not quite a perfect 10. But still, Scottish director Eva Riley smashes it with her debut feature, a gritty and tender portrait of a teenage gymnast wh …
From Charli XCX to Taylor Swift: 10 of the best albums made in lockdown Summary: How I’m Feeling Now Charli XCX Announced on 6 April in a Zoom call with fans and released just six weeks later, Charli XCX’s fourth album of metallic …
Perry Farrell of Jane's Addiction: 'I consider myself a late bloomer' Sitting cross-legged in his garden, at 61 Perry Farrell still has a jawline so jutting it looks chiselled out of the mountains above the Sunset Strip. …
Giraffe review – an erotic tale of love, location and loyalty Danish film-maker Anna Sofie Hartmann has crafted this elegant, muted docu-fiction about our fragile sense of identity and place. It’s a movie whose s …
DJ Erick Morillo charged with sexual battery after turning himself in House music DJ Erick Morillo has been arrested and charged with sexual battery. According to a report by the Florida news channel Local 10, police say …
Nadia Rose's dream festival: 'We'd search for Kim Kardashian's earrings in the sea' Summary: Location It’s got to be Bora Bora. It’s always been a dream for me to get over there. I love how secluded it is and it’s super–luxurious. I could real …
Dirty Dancing sequel starring Jennifer Grey announced 33 years after original An official sequel to the hit summer romance movie Dirty Dancing has been announced, 33 years after the first film was released. Jennifer Grey, who st …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Kylie Minogue, Taylor Swift, Maroon 5 Kylie Minogue Say Something What a thorough joy it is to have Kylie back from the country music hinterlands. Say Something is a quasi-disco bop with a …
All killer, no filler: why Greatest Hits are back at the top of the album charts Chart-dominating compilations started in 1958, when Columbia Records packaged up the first smashes by Johnny Mathis as Johnny’s Greatest Hits. The lab …
Salzburg's summer festival: a triumph over adversity or reckless folly? At the performances of Richard Strauss’s opera Elektra in Salzburg this week, the scene in the auditorium was almost as alarming as the murderous psyc …
Wayne Fontana, British singer who topped US charts with Game of Love, dies aged 74 Pop singer Wayne Fontana, who scored a major transatlantic hit with The Game of Love in 1965, has died aged 74 at hospital in Stockport “with his long …
After Wiley, I didn’t have a fight on my hands for once. Why did that feel so weird? I’ll say this for Wiley: at least he showed where the red line was. Because honestly, over the past five years, it hasn’t always been so clear to us J …
Blockbuster battle royale: what was the best summer ever for big-budget film? Planet-killing asteroids! Alien invasions! Sneaky dinosaurs! These were the existential threats that 45 years of summer blockbusters had pre-programme …
Burna Boy: ‘Brothers in the US have been stripped of their knowledge of self’ Burna Boy might be Africa’s biggest music star, but when he speaks, it’s hard to place exactly where he’s from. Ask him about the US, and a mid-Atlant …
Classical home listening: Semele at Ally Pally, Russian cello sonatas and more • Rampant with glorious music, licentious sexual adventure and gods and mortals behaving badly, Handel’s Semele has firmly established itself (after n …
National Indigenous Music Awards 2020: Baker Boy wins second artist of the year title Baker Boy has risen to the occasion at this year’s National Indigenous Music Awards, sweeping up three of the gongs available, including the coveted a …
One to watch: Otta Otta is a Finnish-British singer-songwriter from south London whose electronic pop songs are bright, sharp and strange. On her new EP, Songbook, they …
Fontaines DC: A Night at Montrose, Dublin review – a blast of joy and disquiet Last week, Spotify founder Daniel Ek enraged musicians by stating that they would have to keep the content mills turning (“continuous engagement with …
Papicha review – female friendship and resistance in 90s Algeria For Nedjma (Lyna Khoudri, magnetic), fashion is political. A design student in 1990s Algiers, she clings to what she considers to be her rights – the …
Harry Beckett: Joy Unlimited review – a lost classic from 1975 A welcome rediscovery from 1975, with a promisingly cheerful title. Barbados-born Harry Beckett (1935-2010) had one of the most beautiful trumpet tone …
Jarvis Cocker picks ‘Covid heroes’ for Big Issue special The former Pulp frontman Jarvis Cocker is to guest edit street newspaper the Big Issue for a special edition which, it hopes, will lead readers throug …
An American Pickle review – sweet generational comedy lacks a little bite The British food writer and fermentation expert Thom Eagle writes that “crunch, heat – but not too much heat – sweetness and sharpness and salt” are w …
Perfect 10 review – teenage backflips Fifteen-year-old Leigh (Frankie Box) has channelled her grief over her mother’s death into long, hard hours of gymnastics training. But her honed skil …
Gillian Welch: Boots No 2: The Lost Songs, Vol 1 review – inspired outtakes from 2002 Fans of Gillian Welch and her longtime foil David Rawlings’s reimagining of early country and bluegrass are used to being patient. Until a month ago, …
Brazilian pop sensation Anitta: 'Run for president? I'm 27!' Anitta had imagined that this summer would be a break: a period in which she could record new music. It would have followed 10 years in which she beca …
Tkay Maidza: Last Year Was Weird Vol 2 review – fresh as a poolside mojito Not so long ago, outside of Oz itself, you might have thought “Australian hip-hop” and pictured Iggy Azalea whipping her blond ponytail. But down unde …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Sand Storm So much of the drama in Elite Zexer’s quietly furious debut feature Sand Storm goes down while the Bedouin women in the film are attending to their ch …
Sundance, sunset: is the death of indie cinema imminent? It used to be the dream scenario for aspiring indie film-makers: you would scrabble together a first feature, maxing out credit cards and remortgaging …
'You've been smoking too much!': the chaos of Tony Wilson's digital music revolution It’s January 2000, and Tony Wilson is regaling me with tales of his brilliant career; how signing Joy Division, New Order and Happy Mondays to his Man …
Fania All-Stars, New York City 1971: salsa swaggers into the mainstream Summary: It’s the evening of 26 August 1971, and on the cramped stage of the Cheetah – a glitzy discotheque on Broadway and 53rd in Manhattan decorated in alum …
Antonio Banderas reveals he has coronavirus on 60th birthday The actor Antonio Banderas has confirmed on Twitter that he is suffering from coronavirus. In a message posted on 10 August, his 60th birthday, the ac …
In the Summertime: how Mungo Jerry made a sweltering classic Ray Dorset, singer, songwriter I still had a day job at a laboratory when the melody for In the Summertime entered my head. The lyric took 10 minutes …
House music: Andrew Clements' watching and listening highlights After the deluge of performances, from concert halls and opera houses, that was made available online in the first months of the Covid emergency, ther …
Leon Fleisher obituary When in his late 30s the American pianist Leon Fleisher, who has died aged 92, was struck by a mystery illness that immobilised his right hand, it loo …
Arctic Monkeys raise funds for at-risk Sheffield venue Leadmill Arctic Monkeys have launched a fundraising campaign to benefit the Leadmill, a historic indie music venue in their home city of Sheffield that is at r …
‘It’s hard to believe it when everything’s against you’: the rise of Melbourne’s African diaspora rap scene At the September 2018 launch of Melbourne rap label 66 Records at the Gasometer Hotel in Collingwood, a heaving crowd bounced under the venue’s giant …
Babyteeth review – teen illness drama earns its emotional impact Summary: This debut feature by the Australian film-maker Shannon Murphy, adapted by Rita Kalnejais from her stage play, is well acted, heartfelt, beautifully f …
Wagner: where to start with his music Of all composers, Wagner remains the most controversial. No other classical musician arouses such fanaticism, for and against. Almost all of his impor …
United Voices: an inspiring story of workers' grassroots resistance As work in the UK gets more precarious and the gig economy booms, trade unionism is being reimagined and people from a wide range of backgrounds are j …
Sputnik review – smart Soviet-era sci-fi chiller ‘We sent two into space. Three came back.” At first, no one notices the extraterrestrial stowaway when a Soviet rocket lands back on Earth; the creatu …
The Trial review – coolly observational view of Brazil's crypto-coup In 2016, the impeachment trial of Brazil’s first female president, Dilma Rousseff, began. She was accused of breaking budgetary laws, but in the midst …
Dwayne Johnson tops Forbes list of world's highest-paid male actors Dwayne Johnson, the wrestler turned actor formerly known as the Rock, has again topped Forbes’s list of the highest-paid actors having made an estimat …
Nick Cave: 'cancel culture is bad religion run amuck' Political correctness has an “asphyxiating effect on the creative soul of a society”, according to Nick Cave, who has criticised “cancel culture” in h …
Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion's WAP should be celebrated, not scolded The release was highly anticipated. Two rap powerhouses, Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion, had united to create a mysterious single, and the internet w …
Sarathy Korwar, Flying Lotus and FKA twigs among 2020 AIM awards winners Flying Lotus, FKA twigs and Sarathy Korwar are among the winners at this year’s Independent Music awards, an event recognising artists working outside …
Spree review – shallow social-media Taxi Driver What if instead of roaming the streets of New York in his yellow taxicab, Travis Bickle cruised LA behind the wheel of an Uber listening to bad techno …
The Tree House review – voyage into Vietnamese inner space Here is a strange, opaque but interesting piece from Vietnamese film-maker Minh Quý Truong: an ethno-fictional essay movie. The premise is that a spac …
Gunjan Saxena: The Kargil Girl review – Janhvi Kapoor excels as an Indian Air Force pioneer Bollywood’s pivot to streaming continues with a biopic that presents as an obstacle course of sorts. How to dramatise the trajectory of Flight Lieuten …
Sea Girls: Open Up Your Head review – yearning for the moshpit's return Summary: Of all the teenage rites of passage the pandemic has put a stop to (spontaneous snogging, hanging round shopping centres unmasked, going to school), t …
Phil Collins' greatest solo songs – ranked! 20. You’ve Been Cheatin’ (2010) It gets forgotten that above all, Phil Collins is a music fan. His last album to date, 2010’s Going Back – from which …
Message Man review – gorily efficient Indonesia-set actioner International assassins are well-placed to thrive in a work-from-home gig economy. That’s the main take-home message of this film, in which an Austral …
Mahler: Das Lied von der Erde review – Jurowski's lyrical insights power the great song symphony Most of Vladimir Jurowski’s previous Mahler recordings have been made with the London Philharmonic, taken from their concerts together at the Royal Fe …
Represent: inside a timely film about the tough road women in politics face Summary: The decision to run for office arrived for Myya Jones in the winter of 2016. She was 22, a campus leader for the Black Student Union at Michigan State …
‘I always knew I was wired differently’: why David Arquette went from Hollywood to wrestling Summary: I always had a soft spot for David Arquette. From the first time I spotted him, in a bit part in Beverly Hills 90210, and ever after, whether he was p …
My Rembrandt review – Old Master fanciers in the frame When regular art lovers talk about “my Rembrandt”, they’re talking about what Rembrandt means to them. But when super-rich people use the phrase, it m …
Project Power review – micro-dose superpowers in New Orleans Summary: A punchy, likable trio of performances are the point of this superhero action-thriller with energy to burn. It’s from directors Ariel Schulman and Hen …
Pinocchio review – Matteo Garrone crafts a satisfyingly bizarre remake There is something rich and strange and generous in Matteo Garrone’s new live-action version of the Pinocchio story, for which the director and his co …
Claire Oakley's fantasy festival: A dozen debut films, three square meals, zero popcorn For the past five years I’ve obsessively watched debut films. My wife has, on several occasions, prayed for the moment when we can stop. But for all t …
Alula Down: Postcards from Godley Moor, Summer 2020 review – a hazy lockdown in Weirdshire Lockdown albums have already been noted in pop, rock and rap, but August brings another, hazier, folkier creature to this peculiar summer. Alula Down …
Kath Bloom: Bye Bye These Are the Days review – beguiling, defiant folk It can be hard to write about Kath Bloom’s songwriting without drawing on a vocabulary that could diminish her. There is a nakedness to her writing, a …
Colombian pop star J Balvin in recovery after 'getting coronavirus bad' J Balvin, one of the world’s most-streamed pop stars, has said he contracted coronavirus and is in recovery. The Colombian vocalist, 35, revealed his …
Katy Perry: 'I've done a lot of falling flat on my face' Summary: Via a webcam into her Los Angeles home, Katy Perry slowly descends into frame, nine months pregnant with her first child. She looks like the Virgin Ma …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Billie Eilish, Ava Max, Action Bronson Billie Eilish My Future Billie says her new single, a “really, really personal and special” song, was written over two days in lockdown with her broth …
Julian Bream, British classical guitarist, dies aged 87 Julian Bream, the British guitarist regarded as one of the finest exponents of the classical style, has died aged 87. The news was confirmed by his ma …
Gus Dapperton: ‘I’d put in 10,000 hours producing by the time I was 18’ Gus Dapperton emerged in 2017 as a lo-fi pop prankster with a lime-green bowl cut and videos that were somewhere between a Michel Gondry short and a Z …
Burna Boy: Twice as Tall review – fun and fury from Nigerian pop polymath For a vivid snapshot of what Burna Boy is capable of, head for track 12 of new album Twice as Tall, entitled Monsters You Made. The music is modern Af …
Streaming: the best of William Friedkin For a director who hasn’t made a major film in nearly a decade, William Friedkin is undergoing something of a surprising revival. The 84-year-old Amer …
'I feel like I'm failing at life': the terrible plight of music event staff Edd Sedgwick is a sound engineer and tour manager who normally works for the Vaccines, but with that group having long planned to take 2020 off, he wa …
Classical home listening: Falla from Mexico City, Elgar from Berlin Summary: • Spanish by birth, drawn to the musical sensibilities of France, Manuel de Falla (1876-1946) combined diverse passions in his scores: from early chur …
The Killers: Imploding the Mirage review – Boss business as usual The thing that strikes you as unusual about the latest Killers album is that it sounds just like a Killers album. It’s all here: the boosterish anthem …
One to watch: Liv.e It’s a challenge for any new artist to break through at the moment, but Liv.e (the E is silent) has ingenuity on her side. The Dallas-born, LA-based a …
Pinocchio review – a mesmerisingly creepy live-action retelling A blush creeps over Pinocchio’s carved wooden cheeks. His hands are clumsy and slightly too big for his body, but his delicately chiselled ears are di …
Idris Ackamoor and the Pyramids: Shaman! review – brilliant shape-shifting With Shaman!, 69-year-old bandleader and saxophonist Idris Ackamoor completes an impressive trilogy of albums since his re-emergence with 2016’s We Be …
House of horror: Host, the Zoom-call hit movie that has Hollywood quaking Summary: It will make you jump, shriek and come up close to one of the most dreaded elements of quarantine: the group Zoom call. Now Host, the tiny British hor …
Babyteeth review – a fearless debut about young love This is possibly the most joyous, life-affirming film ever to be made about terminal disease. The Australian director Shannon Murphy’s feature debut, …
Biffy Clyro: A Celebration of Endings review – smiley vs gnarly Written and recorded well before lockdown, the Scottish rock band’s Covid-delayed ninth album ponders life’s full stops and unforeseen handbrake turns …
My Rembrandt review – to have and to hold the Dutch master In this documentary about a series of eccentric collectors obsessed with the revered artist, the Dutch director Oeke Hoogendijk shoots her subjects wi …
'The god of hellfire returns!' Can Arthur Brown incinerate Covid? Summary: ‘I am the God of Hellfire!” proclaimed Arthur Brown at the start of Fire, the 1968 UK No 1 by the Crazy World of Arthur Brown, an international smash …
Wild at Heart at 30: David Lynch's divisive and unruly road movie There’s a defining moment in David Lynch’s Wild at Heart where Lula (Laura Dern), a liberated southern belle, takes the wheel of a 1965 Ford Thunderbi …
Stormzy gives £500,000 to fund scholarships for disadvantaged students Stormzy has donated £500,000 to fund educational scholarships for students from disadvantaged backgrounds as part of his commitment to becoming a majo …
My streaming gem: why you should watch New Rose Hotel Critics balked at the maverick film-maker Abel Ferrara’s woozy erotic drama when it premiered in competition at the Venice film festival in 1998. A sc …
Why are Warner Bros persisting with the doomed Fantastic Beasts films? Summary: Even as part three begins filming in the UK, Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them is beginning to look like a cursed franchise. Many of us are wond …
Florence's classical ReGeneration: how one outdoor music festival thought big under lockdown Roger Granville, Max Fane and Frankie Parham are not men to let a worldwide pandemic get in their way. Plans for the fourth New Generation festival in …
UK tour by Mark Kozelek cancelled following sexual assault allegations A forthcoming UK tour by Sun Kil Moon, fronted by US indie-rock musician Mark Kozelek who is also known for the group Red House Painters and a solo ca …
Sharon Stone blames mask refuseniks as sister is hospitalised with Covid Sharon Stone has condemned “non-mask wearers” for the fate of her younger sister, who is hospitalised with coronavirus and “fighting for her life”. Th …
'We want a fairer society': Freddy Lim, Taiwan's metalhead MP It’s a crisp December night in the heart of Taipei, and Freddy Lim is presiding over a campaign rally to remember. Flanked by his bandmates, and looki …
CP Lee obituary For a time during the 1970s my friend CP Lee, who has died aged 70, teetered on the brink of celebrity with his Manchester-based satirical rock band A …
Did Jack really have to die to save Rose at the end of Titanic? In the Guide’s weekly Solved! column, we look into a crucial pop-culture question you’ve been burning to know the answer to – and settle it, once and …
Hole, Reading festival 1994: grieving widow expels the pain Hole’s Reading festival debut came shrouded in a certain level of morbid anticipation. Female-fronted acts on the festival’s main stage are a rare sig …
How we made Flash Gordon – by Brian Blessed and Mike Hodges Brian Blessed, Prince Vultan “GORDON’S ALIVE?!” The butcher, the baker, the candlestick-maker, queens, prime ministers – everybody who exists wants me …
Russell Crowe's Unhinged plea: only he can persuade us back into cinemas Summary: As if you didn’t already know, this is not a good time to be in the cinema business. They might have reopened, but post-lockdown they are sparsely att …
Linda Manz obituary Summary: Linda Manz, who has died aged 58 from lung cancer, gave one of the most haunting child performances in all cinema in Terrence Malick’s 1978 film Days …
House music: Rian Evans' watching and listening highlights I’ve had Gerhardt’s Hyperion recording of the six Bach Cello suites on constant rotation during the last few months. Calming and stimulating – whateve …
'I'm a tough little rebel': Linda Manz, Hollywood's anti-star remembered Linda Manz, who has died from pneumonia and lung cancer aged 58, had a career, if it can even be described as such, that was the antithesis of Hollywo …
‘I love gay techno!’ Sigur Rós singer Jónsi on his bold new direction Around 2010, Jónsi Birgisson, the angel-voiced frontman of Icelandic post-rock experimentalists Sigur Rós, had plans to start a new musical side proje …
Mark Kozelek denies sexual abuse allegations Mark Kozelek, the American songwriter recently accused of sexually assaulting three women, has “unconditionally” denied the claims made against him. I …
Pandit Jasraj: tributes paid to 'incomparable genius' of Indian classical music Summary: The Indian classical vocalist Pandit Jasraj has died at the age of 90, a man described by one of his senior disciples, Sanjeev Abhyankar, as “an incom …
Still House Plants: 'In experimental music there's a lot of whiteness, snobbery, pretension' A show by Still House Plants might start with drummer David Kennedy thoughtfully assembling his kit. Only once the kick is weighted down, the snares a …
Alex the Astronaut: 'I didn’t want to tell anyone that I was gay, let alone millions of strangers' One of the most affecting moments on Alex the Astronaut’s debut album tells a story that is not her own. I Like to Dance is a striking first-person ac …
'It's meant to be triggering': the artist unpacking Melbourne Town's Hall's 'skeletons in the closet' Naretha Williams stares ominously from the cover of her new LP Blak Mass, hands outstretched as if performing an incantation. Standing in front of a l …
Chariots of Fire actor Ben Cross dies aged 72 Summary: Ben Cross, star of stage and screen, has died at the age of 72. The actor, best known for his role in Oscar-winning drama Chariots of Fire, died in Vi …
Fame star Barry Miller remembers Alan Parker: 'He changed my career, almost instantaneously' Summary: My relationship with Alan Parker was the most important and seminal experience of my youth. He understood me in a way that very few people had the abi …
'We were dancing on cars in the epicentre of porn and filth!' An oral history of Fame, 40 years on Forty years ago, Alan Parker’s musical about a group of teenagers at the New York High School for the Performing Arts was released. Originally titled …
Britney Spears files for father to be replaced as court-appointed guardian Britney Spears is seeking to make major changes to the court-appointed conservatorship that has controlled various aspects of her life since a public …
Chopin: where to start with his music Though he wrote no operas, oratorios or symphonies – nothing, in fact, that did not involve a piano – Frédéric Chopin (1810-1849) was one of the supre …
Ava review – smart teenage thriller amps up the micro-tyrannies There is a moment in this almost forensically severe film when a furious mother jams her fingernails into her rebellious daughter’s cheek. Her hand is …
Stevie Wonder, Festac 1977: a unifying moment of transatlantic black pride Staged in Lagos, Nigeria, Festac 77 (The Second World Festival of Black and African Arts and Culture, to give it its full name) was the cultural clima …
A mushroom-related brush with mortality: how John Cage fell for fungi In February 1959, while on a visit to fellow composer Luciano Berio in Milan, John Cage appeared five times on a popular Italian television quiz show …
Wonders in the Suburbs review – charming genuine oddity of a film As an actor, Jeanne Balibar has done fine, intelligent work for decades with directors ranging from Jacques Rivette to Pedro Costa: I last saw her in …
Ben Cross obituary The actor Ben Cross, who has died of cancer aged 72, took the film world by storm in the Oscar-winning Chariots of Fire when he played Harold Abrahams …
Ladj Ly on shocking President Macron with his Paris riot film: 'How could he not know?' When Ladj Ly was a teenager, his mate stole a lion cub from the circus. The pair kept it in an apartment, but it cried for its mother, upset the neigh …
'We’re all trying to make contact': the story of a moving new Netflix film If you were to contact extraterrestrial life, what would you say? How would you make yourself understood? What context is universal? To John Shepherd, …
Chemical Hearts review – elaborately contrived YA tale of young love The YA genre has evolved in an eerie parallel-world to high school comedies, a solemn Jekyll to comedy’s Hyde. The latter are mostly more accurate, in …
The top 10 long-awaited films –  ranked! 10. The Man Who Killed Don Quixote (2018) Terry Gilliam began filming his twisted Cervantes adaptation in 2000, but the production was derailed by end …
Perfumes review – admirably refreshing French comedy-drama In this extremely French but quite enjoyable comedy-drama, comic actor Grégory Montel, basically a smiley labrador in human form, plays Guillaume, a d …
Love Is Blind review – energetic and blunt depiction of New York street life Summary: Here’s a blast of energy from Wanly Florexile, with a film based on his online TV series depicting life on the streets in New York, a portrait of main …
D’Erlanger & Dunhill: Piano Quintets review – fine quartet revives middling chamber music By any standards, the Sydney-based Goldner Quartet is one of the finest string quartets around today. Much as one would like to hear them in the core …
Burning Man: Art on Fire review – impressive behind-the-scenes glimpse If the inhabitants of Mad Max ever managed a mini-break from the grimness of post-apocalyptic life to a festival, it might look a bit like Burning Man …
Letter: Diane Tammes obituary Diane Tammes and I first met in 1977, when I was the BBC producer of an Open Door public access film campaigning to save the Other Cinema in London fr …
Lars Ulrich's fantasy festival: AC/DC and Bob Marley on Easter Island Location To me the idea of going to a festival starts with the journey, so I like the idea of a special destination. In 2013 we played in Antarctica – …
Joseph Gordon-Levitt: 'Playing a cop means something different now' Joseph Gordon-Levitt could be the model of a modern movie star, to the extent the description does not really fit him at all. Acting is just one of th …
Performers could sing or play softly to reduce Covid risk, study shows Sing softly and don’t shout to reduce the risk of Covid-19 spread, new research suggests, offering a ray of hope for musicians who have been restricte …
Cut Copy on the role of dance music when dancefloors are closed: 'It doesn't really make sense' After almost two decades soundtracking nightclubs and parties, Dan Whitford is getting tired. When the founding member of the indie dance outfit Cut C …
Female British artists underrepresented on UK radio, survey finds British female musicians are dramatically underrepresented on UK radio stations, a study has found. A survey of the top 100 songs by British acts to f …
Mads Mikkelsen's fantasy festival: the guests are kidnapped and Hannibal Lecter does the catering Venue Seeing as I invented the Death Star – well, I did in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story – I think we should hold it there. I’ll have my finger on the …
The Sleepover review – silly but good-hearted family spy fun The Finch family of Cape Cod, Massachusetts – school cafeteria supervisor mom Margot (Malin Akerman), pastry-chef dad Ron (Ken Marino), big sister Cla …
To ideology and beyond: will China's sci-fi movies plot their own course? You might think a nation that effectively banned science fiction for much of its history (during the Cultural Revolution, and for other periods) might …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Remi Wolf, Cardi B, Blink-182 Summary: Remi Wolf Monte Carlo In an interview with i-D in April, LA pop eccentric Remi Wolf – real name! – claimed her favourite song was goofy 90s novelty hi …
'We lost the love': UK nightclubs using Covid crisis to reassess scene Summary: In front of an old mechanic’s workshop in Tottenham a collection of trestle tables, a makeshift bar and a pair of palm trees are being battered by an …
Trini Lopez obituary “From the barrio to Beverly Hills,” was how the American entertainer Trini Lopez liked to describe his life’s journey. Lopez, who has died aged 83 fro …
Cuties: how an unreleased Netflix film whipped up a frenzy of fury Yesterday Netflix released promotional artwork and a trailer for a new film called Cuties (Mignonnes, in its original French). It is the feature-lengt …
Tenet review: Christopher Nolan's thriller is a palindromic dud No wonder Christopher Nolan thinks Tenet can save cinema. That’s a doddle compared to the challenge faced in his film, which, we’re frequently reminde …
Disclosure: 'When you're 15, a club is a pretty terrifying place' And so a summer has passed without a single tent unwittingly erected next to an all-night soundsystem, a single wristband being slipped off and passed …
Streaming: great horror films with a political undercurrent As cinemas tentatively reopen, many of the year’s best films continue to forsake them in favour of streaming – sometimes popping up in highly unpredic …
'The risk is enormous': UK live music still in crisis after reopening For singer-songwriter Frank Turner, an audience singalong is one of the most affecting parts of his live show. For his return to the stage on the day …
She Dies Tomorrow: director Amy Seimetz on accidentally making a Covid horror film Thanks to endless Zoom calls with colleagues and the home-broadcasting of celebrities around the globe, lockdown has made interior decor voyeurs of us …
Classical home listening: Mozart, Brahms and to the movies… • Mozart, prominent in Vienna in the early 1780s as pianist, composer and teacher, was busy raising funds through subscription concerts, his own perfo …
Burna Boy: Twice As Tall review – new heights for the Afro-fusion wizard The tale of Nigerian superstar Burna Boy’s globe-straddling fifth album begins where many artists dream of ending up – at the 2020 US Grammy awards, h …
Andrew McCormack: Solo review – prepare to be seduced I’ve been listening to this album for several weeks, on and off, and it has grown more intriguing each time. For a set of solo piano pieces it’s remar …
Tenet review - high concept and high stakes In Christopher Nolan’s latest head-scratcher and surely the summer’s most awaited film, Russian gazillionaire Andrei Stor (Kenneth Branagh) has access …
Rave on: the rise of middle-aged clubbing culture during lockdown Facemasks and gloves are back – and so are ravers. Lockdown has precipitated a revival of 90s rave culture with middle-aged clubbers reliving their yo …
Nubya Garcia: Source review – a virtuoso's generous solo debut Sometimes, saxophonists seem like the rock stars of the jazz world. Alongside Shabaka Hutchings, Nubya Garcia is the soloist with whom the eclectic, d …
The man who tried to contact aliens from his grandma's living room Summary: In the mid-1960s, when he was a boy living in rural Michigan, John Shepherd began thinking of ways to make contact with alien life forms. “It was roun …
Chemical Hearts review – teen romance with a twist Adapted from the YA novel Our Chemical Hearts by Krystal Sutherland, and starring Riverdale actress Lili Reinhart, this high-school romance takes a fa …
Stick in the Wheel: Hold Fast review – Anglo Saxon Auto-Tune, anyone? Summary: Much of the acclaim for London-based English folk evolutionists Nicola Kearey (vocals) and Ian Carter (guitar/producer) has been down to their willing …
Duckwrth: SuperGood review – a west coast summer breeze In the five years or so since his emergence, Los Angeles-based artist Duckwrth, AKA Jared Lee, has established himself as one to watch.His work spans …
BBC considers dropping Rule Britannia from Last Night of the Proms The traditional flag-waving anthems Rule Britannia and Land of Hope of Glory could be dropped from the Last Night of the Proms because of their percei …
Letter: Dame Olivia de Havilland obituary When she was 93, Olivia de Havilland (obituary, 28 July) kindly wrote to me about Gone With the Wind for a book I was researching. Some weeks into fil …
Justin Townes Earle, US songwriter and son of Steve Earle, dies aged 38 Justin Townes Earle, an acclaimed US songwriter and son of Steve Earle, has died, in news confirmed on the artist’s Facebook page on Sunday night. “It …
'It all crumbled': pop stars on mental health in the age of Covid While in lockdown pop star Arlo Parks started a new routine to help de-stress: working out with her mum and dad. Three times a week the family would e …
PG tips: how Christopher Nolan became the king of the family-friendly action film You can count the directors who’ve been able to command budgets over $200m (£152m) for original blockbusters on one hand, and still have fingers left …
Missy Elliott, Lilith Fair 1998: a sensational burst of black fantasy Created in 1997, Lilith Fair was intended as a testament to female creativity and empowerment – a Lollapalooza-style touring caravan that would consis …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Atlantics When Mati Diop’s Atlantics was released on Netflix last November, I added it to my watchlist and bided my time, saving it for best – like a nice dress …
'Art finds a way': carnivals go off-road and online for coronavirus Back in February, the streets of Trinidad and Tobago’s Port of Spain were full of carnival revellers, as is the custom for what is billed as the great …
House music: Tim Ashley's watching and listening highlights Summary: I’ve spent the last couple of weeks catching up with the Edinburgh international festival, which has moved online and on to the radio this year. At 11 …
I Am Woman: how Helen Reddy’s music roared through the women’s movement When Unjoo Moon visits Helen Reddy, they always gravitate towards the record player Moon bought the singer. Reddy, who’s been diagnosed with dementia, …
Rule, Britannia! will be played at Proms but not sung, BBC confirms The Last Night of the Proms will feature the traditional flag-waving anthems Rule, Britannia! and Land of Hope and Glory, the BBC confirmed on Monday …
Van Morrison blasts Covid gig limits as 'pseudoscience' Van Morrison has denounced the supposed “pseudoscience” around coronavirus and is attempting to rally musicians in a campaign to restore live music co …
The Prison Within: inside a moving documentary about restorative justice Summary: Troy Williams had his guard up when Katherin Hervey visited San Quentin state prison, where he was serving a life sentence for kidnapping and robbery. …
Sing Hallelujah? Batfleck, Batman and Chris Pine's Steve Trevor all return at DC FanDome Fantasy Hollywood producer is a fun game to play. Imagine being given the resources to – just for a laugh – resurrect Alex Cox’s doomed version of Fea …
Hippy dream or total nightmare? The untold story of Isle of Wight 1970 Shortly before the infamous 1970 Isle of Wight festival, Stanley Dunmore, a local public health inspector, worried about “a possible breakdown of publ …
Tenet review – supremely ambitious race against time makes for superb cinema Who shall save cinema? Not James Bond apparently. There’s been a brand-new Daniel Craig spectacular ready to go since Easter, arguably just the thing …
Proms row: Johnson calls for end to 'cringing embarrassment' over UK history Boris Johnson has said the UK should stop “our cringing embarrassment about our history” and sing Rule, Britannia! at the Last Night of the Proms, as …
Megan Washington's happiness problem: 'What the hell do you write songs about?' Before she made her new album, Megan Washington had to ask herself some big questions. The most important of which was: what happens to the music if y …
‘Trump-like culture war’: Boris Johnson wades into Proms row It started as a speculative story in a Sunday newspaper and ended up as another skirmish in a culture war – which filled front pages, prompted calls t …
Riley Gale, frontman with thrash metal band Power Trip, dies aged 34 Riley Gale, lead singer of Texas thrash metal band Power Trip, has died aged 34. No cause of death has been announced. The band wrote in a statement: …
JS Bach: where to start with his music ‘The immortal god of harmony”: that’s what Beethoven, no less, called Johann Sebastian Bach. “Music owes as much to Bach as religion to its founder,” …
Rising Phoenix review – stirring salute to the stars of the Paralympics Presumably, the makers of this documentary about Paralympic athletes were expecting its release to coincide with the Tokyo games this year, only for t …
Tupac Shakur letters and Notorious BIG's crown up for auction at Sotheby's A series of love letters written by Tupac Shakur and a crown worn by Notorious BIG during a photoshoot a few days before his death are among the items …
Tom Cruise performs death-defying stunt: watching Tenet in a packed cinema We’ve seen him climb skyscrapers. We’ve seen him shatter his ankle leaping between buildings. We’ve seen him cling to the side of an aeroplane as it r …
Love You Forever review – loopy, time-bending romcom Summary: Drawn from a Zhang Zhi novella, yet taking its behavioural cues from the much-reproduced photo of Einstein sticking out his tongue, this goofy Chinese …
Riley Gale: the death of thrash metal's great idealist is a terrible loss Fusing the technical prowess of thrash metal with the warp speed blast of hardcore – and a political stance that emphasised compassion and tolerance – …
From Memento to Interstellar: our writers pick their favourite Christopher Nolan films Following Shot in parts over the course of a year on a shoestring budget of roughly $6,000, Christopher Nolan’s auspicious debut hearkens to the sort …
John Lennon killer Mark David Chapman denied parole for 11th time Summary: Mark David Chapman, who murdered John Lennon outside his New York apartment in 1980, has been denied parole for the 11th time. A parole board at Wende …
Anbessa review – heart-rending tale of a boy living on the edge The American director Mo Scarpelli makes a miraculous discovery in her new documentary – a 10-year-old Ethiopian farm boy who has been displaced from …
Hope Gap review – marriage hits the rocks at the seaside The last film playwright-screenwriter William Nicholson wrote was Breathe, a based-on-a-true-story drama about a deeply happy marriage challenged by t …
Bettye LaVette: 'James Brown would have fired Kanye West 12 times' Summary: Bettye LaVette is talking about James Brown and liberally fire-hosing one of her favourite words down the fuzzy line from New Jersey. “That muthafucka …
Away review – silent, surreal and entrancing animation Summary: If you have ever sat through the end credits of a mainstream cartoon feature, whether it’s because your kid kicked their shoes under the row in front …
I'm Thinking of Ending Things review – another superb nightmare courtesy of Charlie Kaufman With his new film, Charlie Kaufman again proves that if you want something to make you feel trapped in a terrifying claustrophobic nightmare for ever …
The greatest hardcore rave tracks – ranked! 25. Bug Khan and Plastic Jam – Made in Two Minutes (1991) If hardcore rave was rooted in house and techno, the prosaically titled Made in Two Minutes …
Ives: Complete Symphonies review – Dudamel captures the rapture of an iconoclast Before normal concert life ground to a halt in March, one of Gustavo Dudamel’s last projects with the Los Angeles Philharmonic was a cycle of Charles …
The Lost Prince review – father-daughter storybook tale is full of heart Few directors this century have suffered a more precipitous decline in their critical reputation than Michel Hazanavicius. It was less than a decade a …
All Together Now review – misfiring Netflix drama tries to tackle too much Brett Haley’s charming 2018 music drama Hearts Beat Loud should have been the toast of Sundance after its festival premiere. It was a sweet, progressi …
Melanie C's fantasy festival: Beyoncé, Prince and five kinds of chips Location I’m not going too tropical or exotic. I was lucky enough to play a mountain festival near Keswick in the Lake District a couple of years ago, …
Barry St John obituary My friend Barry St John, who has died aged 76, was one of the elite group of backing singers who were the first choice for major 1970s artists keen to …
Washington: Batflowers review – a brooding swirl of survival and surrender No, really, this is her happy face. That Batflowers arrives, and in the main leaves, with its exuberance trimmed and its perspective lowered to somewh …
Theresa Ikoko's fantasy festival: great glass elevators, John Boyega and her brother's jollof rice Summary: Price of admission Entry is free, but only if you can perfectly spit any verse from 21 Seconds by So Solid Crew. When I was younger, I used to watch t …
UK rapper Nines: 'I want to take the hood with me and help everyone out' Summary: ‘We’re probably the only estate left in London with a concrete pitch,” says Courtney Freckleton, better known as the rapper Nines. He is talking about …
Babe, Terror: Horizogon review – hear the dread and hope of lockdown ‘I thought of this as a soundtrack from an apocalyptic São Paulo,” says Claudio Szynkier, AKA electronic producer Babe, Terror, of his latest album Ho …
Toni Braxton: Spell My Name review – master of breakups and baby-making Toni Braxton’s career has been hampered at times by multiple bankruptcies, coping with lupus, and reality TV show drama on Braxton Family Values. Ther …
One Night in Bangkok review – killer-in-a-cab thriller stuck in first gear Summary: Lacking much else, this VOD-bound actioner offers two unexpected comebacks for the price of one. The star is Mark Dacascos, erstwhile straight-to-vide …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Miley Cyrus, Lupin, Peaches Miley Cyrus Midnight Sky “See my lips on her mouth, everybody’s talking now,” muses 2013’s most wanted on this disco-tinged, post-divorce banger. The …
Do you remember the first time? The joys of YouTube reaction videos Summary: Earlier this month a wonderful thing – remember those? – happened. Twin brothers Tim and Fred Williams, who post YouTube vids under the name Twinsisth …
Driven to Abstraction: the inside story of a $60m art forgery hoax Summary: In November 2011, the arthouse Knoedler & Company – an Upper East Side mainstay and one of modern art’s most trusted and elite shops – shuttered in th …
'Seize it. Enjoy it': Chadwick Boseman embraced the joy and gravity of his films It would be damning Ryan Coogler’s Black Panther with faint praise to call it the best of the Marvel movies. Rather, it is that studio’s only film to …
Chadwick Boseman: the unbearable loss of a prince of American cinema His beauty, his grace, his style, his presence and — until what stunned admirers must now understand to have been the very end — his youthful, boyish …
Classical home listening: Jamie Barton sings Jake Heggie • Of the many connections between Joyce DiDonato, Susan Graham and Jamie Barton – all mega-star American mezzo-sopranos – one fact in particular unite …
Get Duked! review – hyperactive Duke of Edinburgh awards black comedy The Duke of Edinburgh’s award was designed to address what Prince Philip’s former headmaster Kurt Hahn identified as the “six declines of modern youth …
Bill Callahan: Gold Record review – time to join the pantheon of great American singer-songwriters Bill Callahan, the cult US singer-songwriter, isn’t fond of weddings. Even when it’s his wife’s friends who are getting hitched, he feels a disconnect …
One to watch: Big Joanie When Big Joanie formed in 2013, there wasn’t a ready-made scene for black feminist punk bands. As singer/guitarist Stephanie Phillips told the Quietus …
Afel Bocoum: Lindé review – captivating desert blues with a twist Child prodigies don’t always rocket to fame. Songwriter and guitarist Afel Bocoum was inducted into the group of Mali’s late great bluesman Ali Farka …
'Our superhero': black British figures praise Chadwick Boseman Chadwick Boseman has been widely praised for breaking down cultural boundaries and inspiring a generation of young black people, following news of his …
Rule, Britannia! row is ‘a laughable irrelevance’, says former Proms chief Politicians “meddling in concert programming” over the Last Night of the Proms are a “laughable irrelevance”, according to a former director of the BB …
‘He's staring into my soul’: how Phil Collins made teenagers YouTube stars Rock’n’roll stars have for years paid tribute to black musicians who crafted the form; now Tim Williams and his twin brother, Fred – fans of hip-hop a …
Matthias & Maxime review – Xavier Dolan's tale of unspoken love The latest from Canadian arthouse wunderkind Xavier Dolan is the story of two men and one kiss. The men are Matthias (Gabriel D’Almeida Freitas), a ri …
Katy Perry: Smile review – tireless trouper loses momentum Pop’s Queen Weeble, Katy Perry has made wobbling but never falling down her MO, belting out her chin-up, grin-on anthems tirelessly. Yet even she can’ …
Play what you see: how graphic scores can unleash your inner musical genius Matt Ashdown is determined to make all aspects of music-making open to everyone – composing, recording and performing. Haven’t got an instrument? His …
Kelly Lee Owens: Inner Song review – a DJ finds her voice Summary: Delayed to show “solidarity” with record shops threatened by Covid, Kelly Lee Owens’s second album finds the banging techno DJ venturing further into …
Letter: Peter Green obituary Among the many gigs I have attended, perhaps the most surreal was the one that took place in June 1970 in the music room of my school, Woodhouse gramm …
LPO/Pappano review – wonderful warmth and magical moments With a no-nonsense practicality that so far seems to have eluded concert organisers in London, Britten Pears Arts has launched a series of concerts wi …
MTV VMAs 2020: Lady Gaga dominates during unusual pandemic broadcast Lady Gaga dominated an unusual year for the MTV Video Music awards, winning five awards in a strange and disconcerting evening. The singer, who led th …
Paloma Faith: ‘I did a whole tour with postnatal depression. I was devastated’ Summary: There were choirs planned for Paloma Faith’s new album, a swell of voices to fill out the optimistic, celebratory songs. Then the pandemic struck. The …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Always a Bridesmaid Historically, black women haven’t been allowed the luxury of fairytales. In the 90s and early 2000s, there was a modest sprinkling of romantic dramas …
Feels Good Man: the disturbing story behind the rise of Pepe the Frog He’s green. He’s cute. He feels good, man. And he’s an internationally recognized icon of hatred and bigotry. He’s Pepe the Frog, and he’s the subject …
Final tweet from Chadwick Boseman's account is most liked ever on Twitter Summary: The final tweet from the account of Black Panther star Chadwick Boseman has become the most-liked post in Twitter history. The social media company’s …
Proms 2020: LSO/Rattle review – empty Albert Hall allows room to play Playing to an empty Albert Hall can have its advantages, and Simon Rattle and the London Symphony Orchestra’s contribution to the audience-free Proms …
Roger Quigley obituary Summary: My friend, Roger Quigley, who has died unexpectedly aged 51, was a much-loved musician and songwriter, best known for his solo work as Quigley and At …
Reading and Leeds festival announces 2021 lineup Reading and Leeds festival has rolled over two of its 2020 headline acts to 2021, and announced a number of other major artists. Rage Against the Mach …
BTS: K-pop stars become first all-South Korean act to top US singles charts The K-pop sensation BTS have become the first all-South Korean act to rule the top US singles chart, the industry tracker Billboard announced Monday, …
Scammers target UK music festivals forced online by coronavirus Festivals across the UK have been hit by internet scammers this season, who are taking advantage of the fact most have been forced to go online-only b …
Toots Hibbert of reggae group Toots and the Maytals in intensive care Summary: Toots Hibbert, frontman of reggae group Toots and the Maytals, has been admitted to an intensive care unit in a Jamaican hospital with a possible case …
Viv Albertine's memoirs to be adapted for TV Summary: Viv Albertine, the guitarist with the Slits who was at the core of the British punk movement, is to have her life story adapted for a television serie …
Charles & Eddie's Eddie Chacon: 'It took me 10 years to recover from being a one-hit wonder' Summary: Eddie Chacon still remembers hitting rock bottom. “It was 15 years ago,” he says. “And it sounds like something from like a bad movie.” Since childhoo …
Battling on: what Russia's unrelenting appetite for second world war films means The second world war ended – as we all know – 75 years ago. Many things have happened since then, yet the war retains an unending fascination for poli …
Loss of free tuition 'will make UK jazz whiter, posher and more male' Summary: The world-renowned British jazz scene will become whiter, posher and dominated by men unless there is more funding to keep access to tuition free, acc …
'We sound like superheroes!' – the rappers inspired by the Paralympics ‘Biggie made being a big guy cool,” says George Doman. “I want to make being disabled cool. I don’t see why we can’t. Honestly? On this new song, we s …
The Mole Agent: the story of the most unusual documentary of the year With The Mole Agent, Maite Alberdi set out to make a film noir documentary about a spy in a nursing home. She did not expect it to transform into an a …
BFI study calls on film industry to urgently reduce emissions A landmark BFI study has called for the film industry to step up attempts to address its environmental impact – including the possible mandatory repor …
Somalinimo: young, gifted and Somali... and at Cambridge Against the backdrop of the Black Lives Matter movement, and with elite universities under attack for their poor diversity records, Somalinimo celebra …
Socrates review – homelessness and homophobia in São Paulo Brazilian-American film-maker Alexandre Moratto makes a bold feature debut with Socrates, a very personal, good-looking film resourcefully made on a m …
Dave, Little Simz and Jamie Cullum win at 2020 Ivor Novello awards Dave, Little Simz and Jamie Cullum are major winners at 2020’s Ivor Novello awards, which honour the best in British songwriting and screen compositio …
Koko-di Koko-da review – grisly Groundhog Day for grieving couple Summary: Johannes Nyholm’s film is a strange, self-aware little psycho horror about grief: the title is taken from a bizarre (and genuine) Swedish nursery rhym …
'Aggression, but also fragility': how Norwegian black metal grew up Summary: On 8 April, 1991, Per Ohlin – the singer with Norwegian metal outfit Mayhem – killed himself in his band’s shared house in Kråkstad. His body was disc …
Apples review – splendidly poignant and creepy pandemic drama On the opening day of the Venice film festival, the arrivals are struggling to get their bearings. Things don’t work the way they did in the past. The …
Lacci review – handsome divorce drama revels in domestic disaster Fasten your mask straps, it’s the Venice film festival, a socially distanced extravaganza for the year of Covid, where tubs of hand-sanitiser stand in …
Star Wars actor John Boyega says black roles are 'pushed to the side' in franchise The British actor John Boyega has criticised the treatment of characters of colour in the latest Star Wars films, saying they were marketed as importa …
The return of Arab Strap: 'Sex and death are our eternal preoccupations' Summary: ‘I don’t give a fuck about the past or glory days gone by,” sings Aidan Moffat on the opening line to The Turning of Our Bones, Arab Strap’s first new …
Love Guaranteed review – frothy Netflix dating app comedy A cursory glance at Netflix’s daily top 10 tells us a great many revealing things, chief among them that quality, or lack thereof, has no bearing on v …
The Lost Husband review – farm romance is all cheese, no flavour Here’s a bland daytime telly-ish romantic drama that might have been made as propaganda for the current urban exodus – an advert for moving to the cou …
Royal Festival Hall in London reopens with BLM-inspired season Orchestras are to return to one of Britain’s most distinctive concert halls after a six-month absence with a season heavily influenced by this year’s …
Bulletproof review – violent cops flout the rules. Is this meant to be fun? Summary: This crass, macho movie is an LA police drama with an unreconstructed 1970s mentality. Its heroes are tough-guy white cops with chevron moustaches who …
Hard to pardon: why Tenet's muffled dialogue is a very modern problem There is a wonderful exchange in Christopher Nolan’s latest film, Tenet, between Robert Pattinson and John David Washington. “Hngmmhmmh,” says Pattins …
Declan McKenna: Zeros review – pop prodigy is a very 21st-century boy The cover of Declan McKenna’s second album features a blurred photo of its 21-year-old author against a black background. He’s reaching out to the lis …
Lucid review – eerie drama tumbles into incoherence At one point in this British drama, Theo (Cristian Solimeno), the sharp-tongued bullying employer of protagonist Zel (Laurie Calvert), describes the l …
Final Account review – German war testimonies chill the blood Heinrich Schulze is a kindly-looking old man who lived as a child near the concentration camp at Bergen-Belsen in Lower Saxony, Germany. In the course …
The Rock says his family had Covid-19 and urges mask use: 'It's the right thing to do' Pro-wrestler turned Hollywood actor Dwayne Johnson, known as The Rock, said in a video message posted on social media on Wednesday that he, his wife a …
Run to the gills: how Iron Maiden's Adrian Smith got hooked on fishing Summary: It is not hard to spot Iron Maiden guitarist Adrian Smith making his way down Windsor’s Thames Street: he is head to toe in fishing clobber. The 63-ye …
Off and running: can the No Time to Die trailer get us excited about Bond again? Admit it, there’s a small part of you that now considers No Time to Die a bit of a chore. Not only was it the first blockbuster to be shunted back by …
Peter Grimes review – insightful recording is among the opera’s finest Summary: What kind of man is Peter Grimes? Beyond the guilty-or-innocent question that lies, never quite answered, at the root of Benjamin Britten’s opera, the …
Suzanne Vega's teenage obsessions: 'Taxi Driver captured something awful but made it beautiful' Songs of Leonard Cohen After 1967, when this came out, if a stranger asked: “What’s your name, little girl?” and I said: “Suzanne,” they’d go: “Oh, li …
Erick Morillo obituary Half an hour into the 2005 animated film Madagascar, the viewer is confronted with a frozen tableau of jungle animals, poised and ready for a choreogr …
Letter: Chadwick Boseman obituary Summary: While Chadwick Boseman was a theatre student at Howard University, Washington, he applied to join the course that the British American Drama Academy p …
Mulan review – Disney's female warrior charges into reality The most empowered Disney heroine of all has returned. Here is a rousing and forthright live-action remake of the 1998 Disney animation with a blue-ch …
Dick Leahy obituary Behind every great artist there is often a wise mentor, and Dick Leahy, who has died aged 83, played that role for many of the acts he worked with. Da …
Amants review – painterly thriller is sullied by a silly script “You look like a painting,” a rich gentleman tells the heroine, Lisa, in the early stages of Nicole Garcia’s stylish, silly thriller. “I forget the na …
Batman star Robert Pattinson 'tests positive for Covid-19' The actor Robert Pattinson has tested positive for Covid-19, according to US media reports, halting production of the film The Batman just days after …
Why Marc Bolan was 'the perfect pop star', by Elton John, U2 and more Summary: In early 1971, a nine-year-old called David Evans was sitting at home in the suburbs of Dublin watching Top of the Pops. He was already a Beatles fan, …
The New Mutants review – troubled kids add hit of horror to X-Men saga Meet the new mutants, same as the old mutants … or sort of. This is an X-Men spin-off, based on the characters by Marvel Comics artists Chris Claremon …
Hannah Georgas: All That Emotion review – magisterial indie-pop for introverts Summary: Taylor Swift isn’t the only singer-songwriter with an Aaron Dessner-produced album out this lockdown: the National man also recently lent his talents …
Sarah Davachi: Cantus, Descant review – resonant drones on donated organs Summary: The pipe organs that lie – often unplayed and ignored – across tens of thousands of churches were, for centuries, the most complex devices on earth. T …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Jaime Wyatt, Clean Bandit, BTS Jaime Wyatt Rattlesnake Girl When it comes to coming-out songs, Jaime Wyatt’s approach is singular. Pulling on her finest rodeo suit and stubbing out …
Ethan P Flynn: ‘Convincing myself that what I’m doing is good is a battle’ Summary: Ethan P Flynn knew the time was right to drop out of a prestigious place at London’s Guildhall School of Music when he worked with David Byrne on the …
The Disciple review – Indian classical musician sings a lonely tune Summary: Chaitanya Tamhane’s The Disciple comes boldly billed as the first Indian film to play in Venice competition since Mira Nair’s Monsoon Wedding won the …
The Furnace review – brutish western is tough as old leather and good as gold Summary: The empty rows of seats inside the cinemas of Venice is a disconcerting sight, but it’s got nothing on the wide-open spaces of The Furnace, a brutish …
Art thief's story The Duke steals limelight at Venice film festival The story of an ex-bus driver and cabbie from Newcastle upon Tyne who was accused of executing one of the most infamous heists in British history has …
The Duke review – art thief takes one for the common man All rise for The Duke, a scrappy underdog yarn that makes a powerful case for the rackety English amateur, the common man who survives by his wits wit …
Streaming: the Barbican's first-person documentary season A few weeks ago I spotlit the Barbican’s new on-demand streaming service, which launched with a few intriguing hand-picked titles but promised bigger …
Jane Fonda: ‘I'm very rarely afraid. Maybe emotional intimacy scares me’ When Jane Fonda was arrested in Washington DC last December, days shy of her 82nd birthday, there was an overwhelming sense of history repeating, and …
Kelsey Lu: ‘The white, cis, male hetero-patriarchy, it’s all being deconstructed’ In times of crisis, we need to make some space for healing: a long bath, a cry, a nourishing meal. It’s important to put time aside for restoration, a …
The week in classical: LPO/Pappano; BBC Proms review – upbeat pleasures Even for the perennially hopeful, the initial prospect of ghostly recitals given to the sound of one hand clapping dampened spirits. Last week somethi …
Megan Thee Stallion review – a landmark performance One month on from suffering gunshot wounds to her feet, rapper du jour Megan Thee Stallion strides on to a stage in heels. Lit by searchlights, strafe …
I'm Thinking of Ending Things review –  one of the most daringly unexpected films of the year A maze of a movie, in which the walls are closing in and the exit is through a constantly shifting Escher staircase of a storyline: the latest from Ch …
Pieces of a Woman director: gender neutral awards 'a logical move' The decision by Berlin film festival to make its acting awards gender neutral is a “logical move” and a statement about gender equality in the film in …
Pieces of a Woman review – agonised portrait of a splintering marriage Martha and Sean Carson are an average Boston couple preparing for the arrival of their first child. They’ve got the ultrasound scans framed and mounte …
Allison Neale: Quietly There review – cool intimacy personified It’s an alto saxophone sound rarely heard nowadays, cool but intimate, each phrase ending with a tiny shiver of vibrato, and no one deploys it with mo …
Miss Marx review - Romola Garai shines as Marx's daughter gets a punk makeover Italian director Susanna Nicchiarelli made a splash in Venice three years ago with her Nico, 1988, about the last days of the German singer and counte …
Les Misérables review – a simmering tale of two cities The ghosts of Victor Hugo’s downtrodden 19th-century rebels haunt Ladj Ly’s César-winning contemporary urban drama, a streetwise tale of France’s disp …
Hannah Georgas: All That Emotion review – punches wrapped in velvet gloves Summary: Fans of the National might have spotted the burgeoning Canadian singer-songwriter Hannah Georgas opening for the band on their 2019 tour, taking on ba …
Skin: ‘I refused to play the game’ Night after night in her early teens, Deborah Anne Dyer – known to all as Skin – woke up to memories of the same recurring dream. She was standing on …
Mulan review – Disney's dynamic girl warrior hits the small screen… The most muscular live-action Disney remake to date, and certainly the most cinematic, Niki Caro’s junior wuxia interpretation of the tale of the girl …
Golda Schultz: ‘Odd is the word for this Last Night of the Proms’ Born in Cape Town, educated at the Juilliard School, New York, and now based in Munich, the soprano Golda Schultz, 37, stars in the Last Night of the …
Throwing Muses: Sun Racket review – intense as ever Seven years on from Purgatory/Paradise – a 67-minute avalanche of sometimes half-formed songs and ideas – the first striking thing about Throwing Muse …
Hedwig eats Trump: John Cameron Mitchell on his 'musical orgy' about Donald's America Summary: On the morning of 4 November, following his defeat in the 2020 presidential election, Donald Trump will refuse to leave the White House. Instead, an a …
Tricky: Fall to Pieces review – eclectic, pithy pop songs If you were coming to Tricky’s 14th album without knowing anything about him (British trip-hop pioneer), you might wonder if it were the debut of an i …
CBSO 100th Birthday Celebration review – Simon Rattle makes sparks fly as orchestra reunites The City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra marked its centenary with a big concert, albeit with no audience present, streamed from the PRG Studio in Lo …
The World to Come review – a spellbinding romance of stolen hours The World to Come is a ravishingly beautiful love story set in 1850s America, with painterly visuals that nod to the work of Winslow Homer and John Si …
Tim Minchin, Troye Sivan, Midnight Oil: Australia's best new music for September Midnight Oil – Gadigal Land For fans of: Cold Chisel, Dragon, 80s pub rock in general This is the first new Midnight Oil song in 18 years, and we’ve n …
And cut! Hollywood’s obsession with suits as status symbols There is a telling moment in Tenet when John David Washington meets Sir Michael Caine for lunch at his posh London club. “Your Brooks Brothers suit wo …
Tenet makes healthy start in US with $20m opening weekend take Tenet has taken $20.2m on its opening weekend of release in the US – an impressive haul despite being about $30m down on director Christopher Nolan’s …
'I'm surrounded by ghosts': Bataclan survivor Ismaël El Iraki on his film Zanka Contact ‘For three days after the Bataclan, I thought I was dead,” says Ismaël el Iraki, whose debut feature, Zanka Contact, about two lost souls recovering f …
'Beethoven was black': why the radical idea still has power today Exactly 80 years after Beethoven’s death, in 1907, the British composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor began speculating that Beethoven was black. Colderidge …
Jiří Menzel: a daring, defiant beacon of European cinema Summary: Jiří Menzel was the powerhouse film-maker of the Czech new wave, a director, screenwriter and actor who along with Věra Chytilová, Ján Kadár and Miloš …
'We will bring change': the Indian band shaking a cruel caste system When Isaivani starts singing the “beef song” with happy abandon it is nearly 10pm. The audience in the southern Indian city of Madurai seem to have lo …
La Bohème review  – Scottish Opera's Covid-safe Puccini is a triumph Summary: In these Covid-tainted times when concert halls and opera houses are closed to audiences and companies struggle to survive, Scottish Opera’s new produ …
The problem with Mulan: why the live-action remake is a lightning rod for controversy Summary: It’s an understatement to say that a lot has happened since the trailer for Disney’s live-action Mulan was released last year, shortly after Hong Kong …
Dear Comrades review – Konchalovsky wrong-foots us with humour and horror Lyuda Syomina is a proud Soviet who pines for the glory days of Stalin. “It all made sense back then,” she says. “Who is an enemy and who’s one of us. …
Regina King makes history at Venice film festival with One Night in Miami Regina King’s directorial debut stood out at this year’s Venice film festival. There’s the intriguing subject matter: it’s an adaptation of Kemp Power …
One Night in Miami review – a pivotal moment for black America The premise is the Fantasy Football of drama: imagine a select bunch of historical figures, together in one room, putting the world to rights. Tom Sto …
Harris Dickinson: ‘Female nudity is part of cinema history – I don’t mind balancing the playing field’ The punk provocateur Dennis Pennis, played by Paul Kaye, once famously asked Demi Moore whether, if it wasn’t gratuitous and it was tastefully done, s …
London film festival to be 'most accessible yet' as lineup unveiled Organisers of this year’s BFI London film festival have promised the most accessible nationwide event in its history as it presents 58 feature films d …
Live music and audiences return to Barbican Centre in recast autumn season London’s Barbican Centre announced on Tuesday the return of live concerts in a reimagined autumn 2020 season. A concert series, Live from the Barbican …
Sun Children review – Iranian street kids strike gold Summary: Sun Children, by the Iranian director Majid Majidi, gives us a prison-break drama that is escaping to nowhere, and a knockabout school comedy gone hor …
'A climate change-scale problem': how the internet is destroying us Summary: In 2010, the writer Zadie Smith urged users of Facebook to step back and consider the look of one’s Facebook “wall”: doesn’t it look ridiculous, she a …
Coastal Elites review – is this the worst film of the year? The questions of who a work of art is for and what it’s meant to accomplish usually prove germane in the process of criticism, and particularly so in …
DJing formally offered at GCSE: a challenge to a 'colonialised curriculum' When Austen Smart and his brother Scott were kids, they were driven amateur musicians, relentlessly making mixtapes and teaching themselves how to MC. …
Jiří Menzel obituary The film Closely Observed Trains, made in 1966, is a quietly subversive comedy, beautifully shot in crisp black-and-white, in which a workshy young gu …
Oscars reveal new diversity requirements for best picture nominees The Oscars are raising the inclusion bar for best picture nominees, starting with the 96th Academy Awards in 2024. In a historic move, the Academy of …
Why so serious? Tenet and the new wave of 'science-based' time travel movies Back in the good old days, time travel in the movies was a strictly no-strings-attached affair, a straightforward plot device to bewilder a couple of …
Silver Apples synth pioneer Simeon Coxe dies aged 82 Summary: Simeon Coxe, co-founder of the pioneering 1960s experimental electronic band Silver Apples, has died aged 82. He had a progressive lung condition, pul …
The Tomb: Devil’s Revenge review – Shatner cursed in Indiana Jones-like horror William Shatner has banked a lot of goodwill down the years, but he may find himself in sudden arrears. His involvement presumably made this lamentabl …
Summerland review –  smart coming-out and coming-of-age comedy Not to be confused with the British period drama of the same name starring Gemma Arterton and Gugu Mbatha-Raw that came out a few weeks back, this Sum …
Call me by my dead wife's name: can Netflix persuade us we need another Rebecca? The world needs another Rebecca adaptation like it needs another pandemic. After all, Daphne du Maurier’s novel is an unshakeable classic. It has sold …
Silver Apples' Simeon Coxe: visionary who saw music's electronic future Summary: In the late 1960s, before Tangerine Dream’s Phaedra became the post-hippy stoner’s soundtrack of choice, before Kraftwerk’s Autobahn instilled the ide …
Throwing Muses' Kristin Hersh: 'I knew integrity would pull me into the gutter' In 2013, after Kristin Hersh’s 25-year marriage came to an end, she was left broke and without health insurance. The songs she wrote in the aftermath …
The Oscars' new diversity rules are all well and good, but will they make any difference? Here’s a quiz for cinephiles: think of a movie that wouldn’t have won best picture under the Academy’s new representation and inclusion standards. Und …
Stacey Abrams: 'This is not a fight that’s going to be won in a single election' The two months between Labor Day and the US election in November are crunch time for Stacey Abrams. Two years ago, during the 2018 midterms, the Democ …
Stormzy dedicates video for song Superheroes to Chadwick Boseman Stormzy has dedicated the newly released video for his song Superheroes to Chadwick Boseman following the actor’s death last month aged 43. The video …
Savage review – moving New Zealand street-gang saga A pulse of vulnerability beats at the heart of Sam Kelly’s outwardly imposing but unexpectedly touching debut feature. Across three decades, it charts …
J Hus, Stefflon Don and Dizzee Rascal: Rated awards celebrate black British music Summary: J Hus has won album of the year at the fifth annual Rated awards, which celebrate the best of Black British music. The musician’s second album, Big Co …
Kate Winslet and Mark Wahlberg aim for Oscars at unusual Toronto film festival Stars including Kate Winslet and Mark Wahlberg will be unveiling new Oscar-aiming films at an unconventional Toronto film festival over the next two w …
Hard Kill review – Bruce Willis logs out in ultra-basic tech thriller Anyone hoping Bruce Willis might enjoy a career renaissance after his rediscovery in M Night Shyamalan’s Split and Glass: lower those expectations now …
The Lady in the Portrait review – painterly pageantry in a Chinese royal court This French-Chinese co-production about an earlier French-Chinese collaboration offers handsome pageantry amid its lavish recreation of 18th-century i …
Denis Villeneuve's Dune could be the version we've all been waiting for Sometimes it takes the onward march of technology to bring the iconic tomes of science fiction and fantasy to life in their full glory. Peter Jackson’ …
Space Dogs review – cosmic canine mission lacks gravity Ostensibly an alternative biography of Laika, the stray mongrel who became the first cosmonaut, this film faithfully tracks her from her time on the s …
Venice in the age of Covid: ‘The promise of tragedy might be the festival’s USP’ In 1912, prompted by a visit to the Venice Lido, Thomas Mann wrote a tale about ruinous desire in the face of a mysterious epidemic. Death in Venice t …
Ciarán Hinds' teenage obsessions: 'Van Morrison took music into a different dimension' Van Morrison I grew up in the 60s. Music starts to get into your head when you’re about 10. We’d had the Beatles and the Stones being raunchy and the …
I Used to Go Here review – beguiling back-to-college comedy Summary: Film-maker and actor Kris Rey is the cream of the mumblecore generation. Her 2009 debut about young Americans travelling and looking for new experienc …
Doves: The Universal Want review – soaring soundtrack to changing lives Last year, Doves played a series of comeback gigs after nearly a decade on hiatus. The trio seemed startled by the response. “It’s sold out!” frontman …
And Tomorrow the Entire World review – German antifa drama skewers left and right Summary: Raised in a good German family, 20-year-old Luisa (Mala Emde) is now in open revolt, part of a different breed of good family. She’s a first-year law …
All-female rap collaborations – ranked! 20. Lizzo feat Sophia Eris – Batches and Cookies (2013) The single from Lizzo’s pre-fame debut album, Lizzobangers, Batches and Cookies is irresistibl …
LSO/Rattle review – Turnage, Knussen and Britten make an evening to be savoured Ever since he took over as music director of the London Symphony Orchestra, Simon Rattle has made a point of beginning each new season at the Barbican …
Kool & the Gang's Ronald 'Khalis' Bell: a musical chameleon and disco giant Ronald “Khalis” Bell was nothing if not an adaptable musician and songwriter. He began his career aged 13, playing jazz in New York’s famous Café Wha? …
Stormzy’s game face: grime artist goes digital for latest hit Stormzy has filmed the music video for Rainfall, the forthcoming single from his No 1 album Heavy is the Head, entirely inside a video game. The award …
The Painted Bird review – gruelling descent into the hell of wartime Czech film-maker Václav Marhoul has created a monochrome epic of anguish set in wartime Poland: a gruelling odyssey of almost unimaginable horror, fea …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Catfight Onur Tukel’s 2016 “black and blue comedy” Catfight is catharsis by proxy. It goes without saying that the world is absurd and there’s a lot to be mad …
Bróna McVittie: The Man in the Mountain review – eerie ambience and visionary space Softer, more pastoral takes on folk music are hard to get right. Compromises have to be made, otherwise they curdle into tweeness, or float away like …
The Roads Not Taken review – painful chapters in writer's life Sally Potter’s The Roads Not Taken is a sad, painful, self-conscious vignette of a film with forthright performances; it’s a chamber piece in many way …
Susanna: Baudelaire & Piano review – a cool breath of Nordic autumn Susanna Wallumrød’s extraordinary career sees no sign of becoming quotidian. Though a composer – adept in many styles of contemporary music – she’s al …
Our Time Machine: a moving documentary on art, family and dementia Maleonn, the acclaimed Chinese conceptual artist and the son of the former director of the Shanghai Chinese Opera Theater, had wanted his latest proje …
I'm Covid vulnerable: dare I do my bit to save our cinemas? Summary: Lockdown in the UK cost its cinemas an estimated £111m in lost revenue, and their annual income could be down 60% on last year’s. Abandoned filming me …
Cuties controversy sparks #CancelNetflix campaign A call to boycott Netflix on Thursday over the French film Mignonnes – AKA Cuties – has been launched on social media, over claims that its young star …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Deep Sea Diver, Monica, John Frusciante Deep Sea Diver ft Sharon Van Etten Impossible Weight Adding Sharon Van Etten to a song is hardly going to make it worse, but sticking her on one this …
Max Richter's Sleep review – mellow look at his somnolent magnum opus Summary: Max Richter is the genre-defying composer who works for movies, TV, theatre and the concert hall. This documentary by Natalie Johns is about what many …
Aurora Orch/Collon review – Ayres and Beethoven pairing is vivid and lithe Summary: No 52: Three Pieces About Ludwig van Beethoven, Richard Ayres’ BBC co-commission, received its premiere at the audience-free Proms from Nicholas Collo …
Produce Pandas: China's all-singing, all-dancing, plus-sized boyband While the new Chinese boyband Produce Pandas’ ethos represents pretty standard pop idol fare – promoting positivity, acting as good role models – ther …
La Haine review – effervescent classic radiates with rage and comedy Mathieu Kassovitz’s classic of banlieue rage has been rereleased after 25 years with a new urgency and relevance in the Black Lives Matter era. What c …
Memories of Murder review – thrilling rerelease of Bong Joon-ho's breakthrough Bong Joon-ho broke through to global acclaim with an Oscar for his film Parasite, and now the rerelease of his black comic thriller Memories of Murder …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 11-18 September Fidelio Garsington Opera brings Peter Mumford’s concert staging of Beethoven’s opera to its purpose-built theatre in the Chilterns. Katherine Broderic …
Ronald Bell obituary Kool & the Gang were one of the first fully fledged funk ensembles – taking the influence of Sly Stone and James Brown’s pioneering recordings and ble …
Monday review – hedonistic romance drama is a party worth avoiding Four years ago, the Greek film-maker Argyris Papadimitropoulos made a vivid impression with Suntan: a bleakly hilarious Death-In-Venice-type affair se …
Ammonite review – Kate Winslet and Saoirse Ronan find love among the fossils Summary: The open secret of Victorian sexuality is rediscovered by film-maker Francis Lee in this fine, intimate, intelligently acted movie about forbidden lov …
Toots Hibbert, pioneering reggae star, dies aged 77 Toots Hibbert, whose glorious songcraft as frontman of Toots and the Maytals helped make reggae globally famous, has died aged 77. A statement from hi …
Toots Hibbert obituary In the years before Bob Marley shot to worldwide fame, Toots Hibbert, who has died aged 77, was one of the main global faces of reggae music – or at l …
Toots Hibbert's pure, powerful voice carried reggae to the world Bob Marley and the Wailers were the band who transformed reggae from a cult phenomenon outside of its homeland. But it was the Wailers’ rivals, Toots …
Classical home listening: Joshua Bell and a Mahler must-have • In a 30-year career bristling with awards and success as a soloist on the world’s most illustrious stages, the American violinist Joshua Bell has al …
Richard and Linda Thompson: Hard Luck Stories 1972–1982 review – a tempestuous tale worth retelling Summary: Box sets often exist merely to evacuate the wallets of the faithful. Here, though, over eight CDs (or a big download) is the story of one of the most …
One to watch: Moonchild Sanelly If you felt the giddy thrill of Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion’s explicit hit WAP this summer then Moonchild Sanelly is bringing more of the same. Wi …
Turnage world premiere review – a heartfelt tribute to Oliver Knussen The composer-conductor Oliver Knussen died, aged 66, more than two years ago. That loss still feels raw to countless musicians. From his teenage years …
The Broken Hearts Gallery review – one to fall in love with After being dumped and fired, gallery assistant Lucy (Geraldine Viswanathan) drunkenly climbs into the wrong silver Prius, thinking it’s her Uber. Its …
Toots Hibbert's last interview: 'Don’t take life for granted, be careful, be strong' Toots Hibbert brought out his most recent album, Got to Be Tough, in August. What now stands as his final album is a positive listen, with lyrics abou …
Venice film festival 2020 roundup – against all the odds, a triumph In any normal year this might have seemed a pretty decent Venice. But in 2020, the fact that the Venice film festival happened at all seems nothing le …
Toots and the Maytals: Got to Be Tough review – a muscular, uptempo final album Frederick “Toots” Hibbert spent much of his lengthy career singing about resilience during hard times – Pressure Drop, Time Tough, 54-46 That’s My Num …
Penguin Bloom review – Naomi Watts saved by a magpie in charming drama Naomi Watts, an adept and at times electrifying actor, has found herself adrift in recent years. The star who shone bright in Mulholland Drive and Kin …
Toto, ELO, Queen ... why hits from happier times top Covid lockdown playlists It seems that a lot of us “miss the rains down in Africa”. Of all the strange sociological consequences of Covid-19, few would have predicted that one …
Anjimile: Giver Taker review – a compelling debut Summary: Imitation might be the sincerest form of flattery, but ordinarily, artists who draw too hard from one source let down their own muse, and short-change …
The Roads Not Taken review – Sally Potter's poetic vision of mental illness Writer Leo (Javier Bardem) lies in his railroad apartment glassy-eyed and ignoring the phone. We learn that he suffers from an unnamed mental illness …
Another Round review – Mads Mikkelsen anchors boozy tragicomedy The Danish title is “Druk”, a term which is maybe best translated by adding the letter N before the one at the end. Here it is the rather more quaint …
Last Night of the Proms review – party falls flat as BBC miss chance to speak up Summary: The decorations on the conductor’s podium weren’t promising. Neatly covered with paper streamers, a single L-plate half-buried among them, it was an o …
Jo Malone apologises to John Boyega for cutting him out of Chinese ad Summary: Perfume brand Jo Malone has apologised to the actor John Boyega for cutting him out of an advert he conceived, directed and starred in when it was lau …
Summer of 85 review – François Ozon's sunny, sad gay teen romance Originally intended for a Cannes unveiling this past May, François Ozon’s blue-skied coming-out-of-age romance Summer of 85 would have been a fitting …
When art films attack: why The Painted Bird's try-hard horrors fail to land Looking back, it’s hard to pinpoint exactly when it was during The Painted Bird that I got the giggles. Most likely it happened somewhere between the …
Vinyl records outsell CDs in US for first time since 1980s Vinyl records have outsold CDs in the US for the first time since the 1980s, according to data from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIA …
The kids aren't alright: what new film Rocks tells us about UK society Summary: There is a great deal to love about Sarah Gavron’s new movie Rocks but, as a survey of contemporary British youth and their prospects, it is pretty de …
Fidelio review – Garsington's semi-staging speaks to us directly and movingly ‘Oh God, what a moment!” Leonore sings in the final scene of Fidelio as she releases Florestan from his chains. Beethoven’s great plea for justice and …
Gerhaher/Huber review - intimate song recital opens Wigmore season Summary: The Wigmore Hall, which kept many of us sane in June with its live-streamed lunchtime series of concerts, is once more leading the way with its autumn …
The Rolling Stones, Springsteen ... The Killers: what actually is 'classic rock'? In the Guide’s weekly Solved! column, we look into a crucial pop-culture question you’ve been burning to know the answer to – and settle it, once and …
'He was a groundbreaker and a visionary': music writer Dele Fadele remembered ‘Dele Fadele was the first black journalist from the UK that ever interviewed me,” says Chuck D of Public Enemy. “I thought that was amazing. And it w …
How we made: The Human Centipede Tom Six, director This started out as a joke. I saw a TV news report about how a paedophile had got a really light prison sentence and I said it would …
Cuties review – Netflix's controversial child exploitation film is bold, flawed - and misunderstood Should this film be cancelled? Or, to raise a secondary point: should one see this film before taking a view on such things? It’s still surprising to …
Hal Singer obituary The tenor-saxophonist Hal Singer, who has died aged 100, had just joined Duke Ellington’s orchestra in August 1948 – “the greatest musical thrill of m …
Good Joe Bell review – Mark Wahlberg affects in moving homophobia drama There’s a rocky road to redemption for the protagonist of Good Joe Bell and the actor playing him, both gradually reckoning with an uneasy history of …
‘Kurt was fit': the night Nirvana played five-a-side with the Chippendales Scottish music manager and promoter David McLean has staged gigs by Nirvana, Green Day, Foo Fighters, Pearl Jam, Oasis and hundreds more. Ahead of his …
Beirut's destroyed clubbing district: 'I don't know how we will recover' Summary: Beirut’s people are broken. The catastrophic blast that tore through the port and surrounding areas on 4 August obliterated any remaining optimism in …
'We got there!' Cult pop band It's Immaterial back after 27 years Traditionally, it’s second albums that threaten careers: the pressure to repeat or surpass early achievements has provoked many a musician’s downfall. …
Bill & Ted Face the Music review – sweet adventure into middle age Not excellent maybe, but by no means bogus either, this cheerful Bill & Ted threequel brings the story of our two laidback heroes up to the melancholy …
Noel Gallagher says he refuses to wear a 'pointless' mask despite UK laws Noel Gallagher has said he refuses to wear a mask during the coronavirus pandemic, complaining that it is a violation of his liberty. Speaking on the …
Madonna to direct and co-write her own biopic After a nearly four-decade music career, Madonna is getting the biopic treatment under her own direction. The star will co-write and direct the as-yet …
'A voice for our emotions': Poland's club scene fights for LGBTQ+ rights In August, as a giant bouncy castle was throwing a shadow on Warsaw’s baroque-style Ujazdów castle – home to the Centre for Contemporary Art – a party …
AG Cook: the nutty producer behind the decade's most divisive music Describing AG Cook’s haircut is a challenge. Part mullet, part moptop, it also features elements of shag, perm and bowl. The more I try to place it th …
Guard that property! Our reaction to Chris Evans' nudes reveals the remarkable power of Captain America So now we know why Captain America travelled back in time at the end of Avengers: Endgame. It wasn’t so that he could go and experience small-scale co …
Notorious BIG's $6 crown sells for almost $600,000 at auction Summary: A plastic crown costing $6 worn by the Notorious BIG has sold for $594,750 (£461,000) at Sotheby’s first ever auction of hip-hop memorabilia. The crow …
Samuel L Jackson will teach you to swear in 15 languages if you vote Summary: Samuel L Jackson has turned teacher in an effort to try to improve voter turnout in the November US elections. If 2,500 people take action via his Hea …
Cardi B files for divorce from rapper Offset Cardi B has filed for divorce from rapper husband Offset. The filing was made in Georgia, with an initial hearing set for 4 November. The couple marri …
The Tunnel review – a tidal wave of fire and cliche Here from Norway is an old-fashioned disaster movie of the kind we perhaps haven’t seen in a while – I can well imagine a Hollywood remake, though thi …
From Abe Lincoln to ZZ Top: a most triumphant A-Z of Bill & Ted Abe Lincoln Potus 16, Emancipation Proclamation issuer, ill-advised theatregoer. But, most importantly, gives a rousing speech – not dissimilar to the …
Hurt by Paradise review – pretty, pretentious young-mum drama At last year’s Cannes film festival the poet/model/actor/filmmaker Greta Bellamacina revealed she’d been turned away from the festival site by staff b …
The Beatles announce Get Back, first official book in 20 years Summary: The first official Beatles book since seminal Anthology in 2000 is to be published in August 2021. The Beatles: Get Back will tell the story of the fi …
Hendrix and the Spook review – a poor way to honour Jimi As we approach 18 September, the 50th anniversary of the death of Jimi Hendrix, when he was just 27 years old, fans of the acclaimed guitarist may wan …
Late DJ Erick Morillo accused of further sexual assaults Erick Morillo, the dance music star who died early this month, weeks after his arrest for sexual battery, has been accused by numerous other women of …
Black Sabbath's Paranoid at 50: potent anthems of working-class strife Summary: I first heard Black Sabbath’s second album during the part of my childhood when I was most susceptible to its charms. As a quiet, earnest Catholic sch …
I Am Greta review – slick yet shallow Thunberg documentary Summary: This sleek, slick Hulu documentary about the teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg follows her remarkable campaign from the very beginnings to her v …
Express yourself: why Madonna directing her own biopic isn't as ominous as it sounds A great deal of excitement greeted the news, on Tuesday, that Madonna would direct her own biopic, from a screenplay written by the singer with Diablo …
The Devil All the Time review – Pattinson is plausibly icky in violent gothic noir This gruesome, violent, backwoods-gothic noir is directed by Antonio Campos (known for his more intimate chillers such as Afterschool and Christine) a …
The Truffle Hunters review – strange and charming ode to rare dogs A strange, funny, mysterious and rather beautiful film about an activity that’s recherché to say the least: truffle hunting, and it is a taste on whic …
Sacked Sheffield cathedral choristers start 'choir in exile' Summary: Choristers of Sheffield cathedral who were abruptly dismissed in June to make way for a “completely fresh start” are launching a new choir led by the …
Richard and the revolutionaries: why did lefties love Wagner? In 1883, the year of Richard Wagner’s death, the theatre critic William Archer noticed a red-haired, bearded youth who was sitting day after day in th …
Nocturnal review – girl meets older man in seaside drama There are good, sincere performances here, and it is directed with confidence. But I couldn’t make friends with this film because of some social-reali …
Residue review – haunting drama on the dangers of gentrification Residue is a fleeting and haunting lament for what is lost to gentrification, and other tolls on black life in America. But at the same, it’s exhilara …
Barking Dogs Never Bite review – Bong Joon-ho’s canine satire has teeth Bong Joon-ho’s black-comic satire Barking Dogs Never Bite has been re-released after 20 years, and in many ways it could be seen as a thematic forerun …
The Man in the Hat review – whimsical French car chase The English composer Stephen Warbeck won an Oscar for his work on Shakespeare in Love, but has never directed a film before. He makes his writer-direc …
Sault: Untitled (Rise) review – mystery collective make best album of 2020, again Over the last two years, Sault’s music has arrived out of the blue: no interviews, no photos, no videos, no live appearances, no Wikipedia entry, a pe …
Magical Adventures in the Forbidden City review – steampunk fantasy hints at allegory Something of a curate’s Fabergé egg, this peculiar Russian-made steampunk-lite fantasy feature has some interesting story ideas, entrancing visual eff …
Rule of six: what did Boris Johnson mean by 'Animal House parties'? Boris Johnson reached for an unlikely reference in attempts to clarify when exactly British people should call the police on neighbours who break the …
Igor Levit review – Beethoven programme affirms deep affinity Igor Levit’s pianism emerges as a force of nature, hence perhaps in part his deep and seemingly fundamental affinity with Beethoven. As Levit returned …
Stille Liebe: Lieder by Schumann review – drama with poise and style In 1840, Schumann was finally able to marry Clara Wieck, and he celebrated his happiness in his songs, composing at least 138 of them, including his f …
Laura Veirs on surviving her divorce: 'My life is strangely awesome' In 2018, as her marriage fell apart, Laura Veirs cried and biked all over Portland. “I called myself the crying cyclist,” she says. It was a new, impe …
Lovers Rock review – Steve McQueen throws the best party ever Summary: A monsoon of musical and sexual rapture bursts overhead in this film from director Steve McQueen, leaving condensation-sweat running down the walls an …
V&A and Glastonbury festival to launch new digital archive Most festivalgoers’ memories after Glastonbury are a little hazy – or not fit for public consumption – but London’s V&A museum is preparing to publish …
The Eight Hundred: how China's blockbusters became a new political battleground ‘No one knows how this history will be written,” a soldier muses portentously in the new Chinese blockbuster The Eight Hundred. If he could see 80 yea …
Tesla review – portrait of an inventor out of step with his time Every historical drama involves some element of pure invention: maybe it happened like this? Perhaps she said it like that? But Michael Almereyda’s bi …
Ava Max: Heaven & Hell review – turbo-charged 2010s pop joy When Katy Perry’s Smile album recently failed to worry the top of the global charts it apparently rang the death knell for capital P pop. “Life and li …
John Coltrane: Giant Steps 60th Anniversary Edition review – more a giant leap in jazz Within the same few weeks in the spring of 1959, the great saxophonist and composer John Coltrane astonishingly found the composure to play a key role …
Van Morrison criticises 'fascist bullies' in anti-lockdown Covid songs Summary: Van Morrison has described the British government as “fascist bullies disturbing our peace” in one of three new tracks he has written to protest again …
Big Sean's teenage obsessions: 'Darth Vader wasn’t bad, just misunderstood' Marvel/DC Comics I would go to my best friend’s house in the suburbs and his family were white, so would expose me to a whole different way of living, …
Cinema, Campari and a carrier bag of Quality Street: Edgar Wright remembers Diana Rigg “Diana Rigg will meet you at Berners Tavern.” Just seeing those words written in a text gave me an anxious thrill. Despite her illustrious work on sta …
'Colourful, vibrant, sensual!' Stars on Jimi Hendrix, 50 years gone Johnny Echols, Love I first met Jimi – he was called Jimmy James then – at the California Club in Los Angeles. He was down on his luck at the time. Hi …
S-X: the Wolverhampton wonderkid loved by Lil Wayne and Rick Ross From his Wolverhampton garden, producer-turned-singer S-X (AKA Sam Gumbley) can survey his kingdom. His dad’s place is round the corner; the high-rise …
Will the Fantastic Four follow Kang the Conqueror into the MCU? Time travel has come a long way in a short time in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, with Bruce Banner’s ham-fisted dabbling at the beginning of Avengers …
The Queen strips disgraced producer Harvey Weinstein of CBE Harvey Weinstein has been stripped of his CBE. The former movie mogul, 68, was granted an honorary CBE, for his contribution to the British film indus …
Rifkin's Festival review – Woody Allen's latest is a cinephile's dream (but only literally) It’s a peculiar feeling, being at a film festival and watching a film set at that very festival. This makes Woody Allen’s Rifkin’s Festival, kicking o …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 18-25 September Summary: Weekend Concerts at Snape The Doric Quartet kicks off Britten Pears Arts’ latest batch of short concerts, with programmes of Haydn and Mozart, and Moz …
True Mothers review: Naomi Kawase's heartfelt yet frustrating drama The Japanese auteur Naomi Kawase has returned with another of her highly distinctive, tremulously sensitive movies: heartfelt and unhurried, with a te …
After We Collided: does this shock hit point the way to cinema's future? Its success has been hailed as “extraordinary” – not least because no one saw it coming. The YA romance After We Collided has next to no marketing bud …
Terry Barfoot obituary My friend, Terry Barfoot, a widely popular music educator, has died of cancer aged 70. The company he built, Arts in Residence, provided music appreci …
Brendan Mulkere obituary My friend and colleague Brendan Mulkere, London-Irish musician, festival-maker, educator, Anglo-Irish connector and red-hot fiddler, has died at the a …
‘How happy he was’: candid David Bowie photographs by his childhood friend It was a conversation that would change Geoff MacCormack’s life forever. In 1973, MacCormack, a musician and childhood friend of David Bowie, got a ph …
The Water Man review – David Oyelowo's charming directorial debut When an experienced actor steps behind the scenes to become a multi-hyphenate, one usually assumes their directorial debut will have a revealing, if o …
Chloe x Halle: ‘People said our music was too complex for the average ear’ For most people, working from home entails some combination of bad posture, unwashed hair and laundry-based procrastination. For Chloe and Halle Baile …
Sleaford Mods review – a bracing stream of class consciousness Across town at the Royal Albert Hall, the Last Night of the Proms is under way. In the basement of London’s 100 Club – a famous venue in the annals of …
Bill & Ted Face the Music review – surf dudes still lift the spirits Few 80s cultural artefacts have accrued the same level of enduring audience goodwill as the time-travelling adventures of the sweet-natured California …
Tim Garland: Refocus review – a classic 60s fusion revisited Focus was a 1961 album by Stan Getz, wildly adventurous at the time, in which Getz improvised tenor saxophone solos to music composed by Eddie Sauter, …
Rocks review - empowering, uplifting teenage girl power What a wonderful, heart-breaking, life-affirming gem of a movie this is. Having proved a crowd-pleasing hit at the London film festival in October 201 …
Express yourself: why Madonna wants to tell her own life story Summary: “It’s essential to share the rollercoaster ride of my life with my voice and my vision,” Madonna said when it was announced by Universal Pictures that …
Safe arias: how opera blazed the trail for the return of live entertainment Britain’s small-scale opera companies have become surprise cultural crusaders this autumn. From urban drive-ins to remote rural settings, it is this m …
A Swayze and the Ghosts: Paid Salvation review – a faultless debut Summary: No one turns to garage punk for its compositional originality. The genre’s evergreen swagger rarely fails to supply uplift, however, and newcomers A S …
Patti Smith: 'I feel the unrest of the world in the pit of my stomach' Patti Smith, rock star, poet, visual artist and writer, won the 2010 National book award with her memoir Just Kids. The Year of the Monkey, her moving …
Morfydd Clark: ‘In the acting world, my ADHD tendencies are seen as charming’ When Morfydd Clark was 16 years old, she crashed out of school. “After my GCSEs I just couldn’t go back,” she says. “I tried for a term but didn’t do …
Tesla review – sparky biopic of the inventor Summary: Following Experimenter, his nimble 2015 biopic of the notorious social psychologist Stanley Milgram, writer/director Michael Almereyda takes a similar …
Alicia Keys: Alicia review – classic and contemporary Following the publication of her memoir in March, Alicia Keys’s seventh album comes from a more personal place than her previous sets. Some tracks are …
AG Cook: Apple review – magical shifts in tone Summary: Last month, the producer AG Cook released his debut album; a 49-track, seven-disc brain dump called 7G. After years honing his synthetic, plastic fant …
Orchestral manoeuvres in a car park: does drive-in opera hit the high notes? Sweaty, hyperventilating and with frozen hands, I arrive at Europe’s first live drive-in opera like Mimi in La Bohème’s last act. Unlike the opera’s h …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Cam When I stumbled across 2018 psychological thriller Cam on Netflix this year, I braced myself for a tacky technological horror film on the perils of th …
Enola Holmes: Sherlock sister spin-off lives up to its feminist ideals Summary: It is not often Sherlock Holmes gets a taste of his own analysis, but the film Enola Holmes dishes it to him. “You don’t know what it is to be without …
Drill, hardcore punk and pop about snails: new artists for autumn Bartees Strange Bartees Strange, who combined a full-time job (which he only recently quit) with a stream of releases, is hard to pin down. The Ipswic …
Apartment House review – Julius Eastman's elusive music gets its due Until about five years ago, few on this side of the Atlantic knew much about Julius Eastman’s music. He would have been remembered as a vocalist, espe …
Michael Lonsdale, Bond villain Hugo Drax in Moonraker, dies aged 89 Michael Lonsdale, the French-British actor whose best known role was the villain Drax in Moonraker but who also appeared in a string of films by auteu …
Third of British musicians may quit industry amid pandemic Summary: One-third of professional British musicians are considering giving up their careers amid the coronavirus pandemic. A survey of 2,000 members of the Mu …
Mulan: why it was a missed opportunity to create a strong Asian woman on screen As a child who grew up in China with little exposure to Disney until I was eight, the idea of a princess marrying a prince and living happily ever aft …
Winners by default? Where this year's Oscar race stands It’s that time of year, as festival season winds down, when we start to sift through the settling dust to figure out how the shift to awards season mi …
Northern Ireland health minister criticises Van Morrison anti-lockdown songs Northern Ireland health minister Robin Swann has criticised Van Morrison, after the veteran songwriter condemned coronavirus lockdown measures as “fas …
'Fiery, chaotic and full of emotion': This Heat, the band who tried to change everything Over lockdown, says Charles Hayward, he found his thoughts turning to This Heat, the wildly influential band he played in 40 years ago. It wasn’t the …
Supernova review – Colin Firth and Stanley Tucci dazzle as a couple facing their fears Summary: Lovely, heartfelt performances from Stanley Tucci and Colin Firth carry this intimate movie from actor-turned-film-maker Harry Macqueen, whose 2014 de …
Enola Holmes review – Sherlock's rebellious kid sister is on the case Summary: It is hardly believable that there’s yet another Sherlock Holmes ripoff/spinoff – the genre named by the late critic Gilbert Adair “Shlock Holmes”. Bu …
On the Rocks review -  Bill Murray flirts with disaster in daddy-issues comedy Bill Murray amiably shows up on autopilot for this high-concept, low-octane New York caper from writer-director Sofia Coppola – the title of course pl …
Bird Island review – strange goings-on at a Swiss avian sanctuary Slow paced and deploying minimal sound – apart from gentle bursts of voiceover and the sound of wings and planes taking off – this Swiss-set quasi-doc …
Little Girl review – a brave child's journey to her true self Seven-year-old Sasha lives in provincial France, loves ballet classes, dolls, dresses and her family. She may have been born male, but she’s known at …
Charity fundraiser Captain Tom Moore signs film deal for biopic Captain Sir Tom Moore is getting the big-screen treatment. The life story of the centenarian, who raised more than £32m for the NHS by walking laps of …
Tommy DeVito: Four Seasons founding member dies of Covid aged 92 Tommy DeVito, who co-founded the vocal group that became the Four Seasons, has died aged 92 after contracting Covid-19. DeVito’s bandmates Frankie Val …
Leading UK music industry bodies pledge gender equality on boards A series of major UK music industry organisations have committed to gender equality on their boards. These include PRS for Music, which handles royalt …
Fleet Foxes: 'You can fake a guitar solo. You can't fake your voice' Summary: In June, “when everything was that young green”, Robin Pecknold went driving through upstate New York. Long drives, along empty roads, with the window …
Sophia Loren returns to movies aged 86 Sophia Loren is returning to cinema after an 11-year absence. Loren, 86, stars in upcoming Netflix drama The Life Ahead, which is directed by her son, …
Schemers review – the rise and rise of Dave Mclean, rock promoter This account of the rise of Dundee music promoter Dave Mclean, later to become the UK’s tireless ambassador for grunge, is directed by Dave Mclean, pr …
Arthur Wooster obituary Summary: Arthur Wooster, who has died aged 91 after suffering from dementia, was hired by the director John Glen to bring scenes of daredevil action to the scr …
Thurston Moore webchat – your questions answered on black metal, the Fall and the joy of disco Our time is up, sadly. chashumen says: I saw your discussion with Necrobutcher of Mayhem on YouTube. What attracted you to that kind of music? (I’m a …
Southern Journey (Revisited) review – on the road to America's soul Summary: ‘Relevant today more than ever,” says one interviewee in Southern Journey (Revisited), pointing out his Easy Rider pin badge. “Man went looking for Am …
From Dogs in Space to The Castle: exploring locked-down Melbourne through film Which film best represents Melbourne in its current state? I pondered this one evening recently during what felt like the millionth week in lockdown, …
Mercury prize hopefuls Lanterns on the Lake: 'These things don’t happen to bands like us' When Lanterns on the Lake were told they’d been nominated for the 2020 Mercury prize, guitarist Paul Gregory refused to believe it. “Paul was upstairs …
Becky review – stroppy teenager turns tables on neo-Nazi thugs If Wes Anderson ever decided to make a violent home-invasion thriller, you could imagine him writing a character like the teenage hero of this nasty, …
Monsoon review – sweet times and scented tea in Saigon Summary: The rains only come at the end of this film, but there is no drenching emotional release to go with them; the weather is more complicated. Cambodian-B …
Róisín Murphy: Róisín Machine review – still inventing new moves The first thing you hear on Róisín Murphy’s fifth album is a snatch of spoken word, an extract from a monologue that appears in full later. “I feel my …
Capital in the Twenty-First Century review – lavish look at a broken system Summary: Justin Pemberton’s documentary, based on the bestselling book by French economist Thomas Piketty, tells us a story no less depressing or gruesomely hy …
Novák: Piano conc, Toman and the Wood Nymph etc review –  a composer worth knowing? ‘I will be standing up for Novák from now on,” writes conductor Jakub Hrůša. “Novák is worth knowing about, and we must play his music.” This is Vítěz …
Will Nicolas Cage's Superman finally get to fly in The Flash? As rumours go, the one this week that Nicolas Cage might end up starring as Superman in Warner Bros’ Flash movie takes some beating. There’s every cha …
Alice Lowe's teen obsessions: 'Under the bed was Keanu Reeves folded into tiny pieces' Summary: Charlotte Coleman I never gave my parents enough credit for their great taste in TV. We would all sit down and watch Dennis Potter and Twin Peaks toge …
23 Walks review – dog-lovers follow the path to romance Pensioner Dave (played by Dave Johns, from I, Daniel Blake) is a retired psychiatric nurse, living alone near Hampstead Heath, London, where he regula …
Bafta tries to increase diversity with 120 changes to its awards Bafta has announced a complete overhaul of its awards system, which includes adding 1,000 new members to its committee and limiting the amount that st …
Michael Kiwanuka wins 2020 Mercury prize The 2020 Mercury prize for the year’s best British album has gone to Michael Kiwanuka for his self-titled album, Kiwanuka. “I’m over the moon, so so e …
The Trial of the Chicago 7 review - totally exasperating court drama Screenwriter Aaron Sorkin, creator of TV’s The West Wing and the birth-of-Facebook movie The Social Network, can give you sizzling dialogue and get yo …
From Ida to The Evil Dead: 10 of the best films under 90 minutes A Hard Day’s Night (87 mins) This is not the moment for ponderous blockbuster cinema: concentration spans, we are told, are plummeting in the Covid er …
David Attenborough: A Life on Our Planet review – stark climate emergency warning ‘I am David Attenborough and I’m 93. This is my witness statement.” There is a tremendously moving sense of finality about Attenborough’s terrifying n …
Miss Juneteenth review – inspiring tale of a beauty-pageant mother's dreams This debut feature from Channing Godfrey Peoples is lit with pride for Black Texan culture: the BBQ, the beauty pageants, historic black colleges and …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Steps, Lava La Rue, Janelle Monáe Steps What the Future Holds Steps were always the Rice Krispies of millennial pop: beloved but never afforded prime position in the cereal aisle. But …
Tory Lanez denies shooting Megan Thee Stallion in new album lyrics Rapper Tory Lanez has denied shooting chart-topping rapper Megan Thee Stallion in a July incident in Los Angeles. On his new album Daystar released to …
Rebuilding Paradise review – after the wildfire in a California town As America’s west coast continues to burn, this Ron Howard-directed documentary tells of the aftermath of the 2018 wildfires in Paradise, California. …
Songs about sewage and space travel? It's prog-folk band Hen Ogledd It is about halfway through our video chat that Trouble turns up. While Hen Ogledd officially comprise Dawn Bothwell, Rhodri Davies, Richard Dawson an …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 25 September to 2 October Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra The RLPO returns to its home in the Philharmonic Hall for an autumn season of live and streamed concerts. The s …
Rishi Sunak's winter economy plan will silence the UK music scene On Thursday, Rishi Sunak announced his Winter Economy Plan, which brings to an end the furlough and self-employed job retention schemes. I agree that …
Mangrove review – Steve McQueen takes axe to racial prejudice Vivid, immediate and impassioned, this new movie episode in Small Axe, Steve McQueen’s five-part film series for the BBC, is about the Mangrove Nine c …
Janelle Monáe: ‘What is a revolution without a song?’ Summary: A downside, perhaps, to the sheer imaginative power of Janelle Monáe is that it’s hard not to bring unreasonable expectations to any conversation one …
Father of the Bride 3 review: Zoom reunion helps you miss weddings a little less “What are we, the schmaltz family?” asks Matty, played by Kieran Culkin, the now grownup son of Steve Martin’s George and Diane Keaton’s Nina in Fathe …
Classical home listening: from Tabea Zimmermann to Walter Kaufmann • If you’ve queried the point of listening to a Bach cello suite played on the viola, Tabea Zimmermann’s Solo II (Myrios Classics; released 16 October …
ENO's drive-in La bohème review – honk your horn for Mimi and Rodolfo Mimi’s sickbed is the floor of her transit van. Rodolfo sits hunched against a wheel outside, the closest he dare get to his dying lover. Musetta make …
Fleet Foxes: Shore; Sufjan Stevens: The Ascension review – postcards from the edge Upheaval, transformation, succour: many of us are either actively witnessing – or desperately seeking – these conditions right now. All three states f …
Little Girl review – a tender film of Sasha's struggle over gender From the age of two and a half, Sasha has insisted she’ll grow up a girl. She was born in a boy’s body. In his tender observational documentary, film- …
Emmy the Great: 'Live music's going to be weird, but it also might be cathartic' Emma-Lee Moss, 36, has recorded four albums as Emmy the Great, including her forthcoming LP, April /月音, inspired by explorations of her Hong Kong-Chin …
Diana Jones: Song to a Refugee review – tender testimony to bruised lives Brought up in New York by adoptive parents, Diana Jones later traced her birth family to Tennessee and a musician grandfather, and her records have, a …
Sarah Paulson: ‘If I’m terrified, I feel compelled to do it’ Summary: I got a report yesterday saying it was up by…” Sarah Paulson pauses, weighing up whether she wants to reveal the extent of her daily screen time. Then …
Cultural revolutions: how dub reggae’s beats conquered 70s Britain Music producer Mad Professor has been mixing dub reggae in his Croydon studio for 35 years. “When dub hits you in the chest you feel it,” he said. “It …
Miss Juneteenth review – the stuff of dreams Earlier this year, Philippa Lowthorpe’s socio-comedy Misbehaviour entertainingly addressed the intersection between sexism and racism through the biza …
Capital in the Twenty-First Century review – Piketty in a pop culture package Capital in the Twenty-First Century is not so much a critique of capitalism as a critique of its corruption. In New Zealand film-maker Justin Pemberto …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Road to Bali How’s this for an official plot synopsis? “Hope and Crosby have to flee Melbourne in order to avoid two marriage proposals, and find themselves in Bal …
Parental neglect: why are father-daughter relationships so rare in film? In Sofia Coppola’s new movie, On the Rocks, mum Laura (Rashida Jones) worries that her husband has another woman in his life. But it is Laura who has …
Heart Shaped Music Box? Mariah Carey reveals secret 90s grunge project With her immaculate, glamorous image, Mariah Carey is the last person you’d expect to don a plaid shirt, ripped denim and mope over a squall of electr …
Joaquin Phoenix and Rooney Mara name their baby son River Summary: Joaquin Phoenix, who won an Oscar this year for his role in the film Joker, has reportedly welcomed his first child with fiancee Rooney Mara. They nam …
David Lynch has your number. But does it add up? You might not have realised it at the time – you might not even realise it now – but on Friday afternoon, something truly momentous happened: David Ly …
The Glorias review – Gloria Steinem biopic is a laughably shoddy mess It takes less than a minute into The Glorias, the director Julie Taymor’s shallow biopic of the feminist icon Gloria Steinem, to realize something is …
'I need to spread love with the gifts God gave me': funk master Steve Arrington returns Yellow Springs, Ohio, is buzzing, despite it being a weekday afternoon in a pandemic. When Steve Arrington and I meet at a cafe on the town’s main str …
'I want to break cinema': is Dick Johnson Is Dead the most radical film of 2020? We’re living in boom times for non-fiction cinema, what may be one of the most creatively fertile periods in the history of the American documentary. …
Music is an act of communication. Without anyone listening it doesn't exist After seven months of musical silence, I feel very fortunate to be giving a public concert this week with the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra. The aud …
Back to where you came from: how Vietnam drama Monsoon ignites the battle for belonging ‘Go home!” or “Go back to where you came from!” are words that people of colour hear and swallow all the time. Having grown up in the UK, such jeers i …
Tommy DeVito obituary No As a founding member of the US vocal quartet the Four Seasons, Tommy DeVito, who has died aged 92 of Covid 19, made history by being in the first g …
The Lion King 2 to be directed by Moonlight's Barry Jenkins Moonlight Oscar-winner Barry Jenkins is set to direct a follow-up to 2019’s hit remake The Lion King. The writer-director, who won the best adapted sc …
Helen Reddy, Australian singer of feminist anthem I Am Woman, dies aged 78 Helen Reddy, the Australian singer best known for her anthemic 1972 hit I Am Woman, has died at 78. Reddy had been diagnosed with dementia in 2015 and …
'Audiences won’t have seen anything like this': how Iranian film Chess of the Wind was reborn Summary: The rediscovery of a film is seldom as fascinating a story as the film itself, but that’s the case with Chess of the Wind (Shatranj-e Baad), directed …
Bob Mould, alt-rock's gay icon, takes on American evil: 'My head's on fire!' It’s been a fortnight since Bob Mould could open his windows. “The air is pretty toxic,” he reports from his home in San Francisco, as the California …
Schubert: where to start with his music He composed more than 600 songs – taking the art of writing German Lieder to a new plane – as well as seven completed symphonies, chamber music and pi …
Rialto review – raw emotional power fuels a punishing character study Peter Mackie Burns’s painful, unhappy drama packs a hard punch; you must steel yourself for the emotional blows. Tom Vaughan-Lawlor is excellent as 46 …
That Click review – photographer tribute develops into a dud This serviceable if somewhat glib documentary pays tribute to the photographer Douglas Kirkland, an industry veteran who has been around long enough t …
Helen Reddy obituary Summary: Every social movement has its definitive song, and feminism got its anthem in 1972, when the Australian singer Helen Reddy released the single I Am Wo …
A Perfectly Normal Family review – trans drama told from the heart Summary: Danish director Malou Reymann makes her debut feature with this gentle, open-hearted drama based on her own childhood experience of her dad transition …
AC/DC reunite, featuring three former members AC/DC have announced a reunion, featuring members who had left the classic rock band in recent years. A new post on their Instagram account depicts vo …
Brothers in Arms review – Platoon's veterans hold their audience hostage The cast of Oliver Stone’s 1986 Vietnam classic Platoon heartily exchange old war stories in this making-of documentary by two of their own: Paul Sanc …
Borat praises Donald Trump on Twitter ahead of new film Summary: A parody Twitter account styled to represent the government of Kazakhstan but apparently in promotion of the forthcoming Borat sequel, has praised Don …
20 best African films – ranked! 20. Borders (2017) The film’s director, Apolline Traoré, was born in Burkina Faso and educated in the US before returning to the country of her birth …
Horse Meat Disco: 'A naked clubber became our mascot. He had his cigarettes in his socks' Every club night has its defining “were you there?” moment and, for Horse Meat Disco (HMD), it was Kate Bush and a lot of dry ice on New Year’s Day 20 …
I Will Walk With My Love review – gifted soprano finds depth and dancing in folk-classical debut Summary: At a time when many opera singers are out of work and chances to hear the full-throttle human voice in all its glory are few, a new recital disc as go …
Avatar 2 is ready for launch – but has James Cameron left it too late? Summary: If James Cameron’s Avatar were a pop song it would be Bohemian Rhapsody by Queen, an epic concoction that brings immense joy the first time it is expe …
Elvis Costello's teenage obsessions: 'I had a massive crush on Judi Dench in 1966' Talking to a Stranger My view of the world was coloured by the fact that my parents separated, and I used to go to the movies – the pictures as we cal …
Elton John voices support for face masks after being accused of breaking rules Elton John’s spokesperson has said the singer is “fully supportive of wearing a mask in public” after he was accused of flouting face mask rules durin …
The Forty-Year-Old Version review - Radha Blank's New York chamber comedy The Forty-Year-Old Version is a rangy, laidback, one-woman-show type of film with an interesting tang of disillusionment. It comes from Radha Blank, w …
Blackpink: The Album review – brilliance from the world's biggest girl band Summary: In some benighted corners of the internet, the big news a couple of weeks ago was the latest battle in the ongoing war between fans of South Korean bo …
Snowdrops: Volutes review – musical studies from the edge of humanity Summary: While working as a radio operator during the first world war, Maurice Martenot became fascinated by the pure sine waves that were accidentally produce …
Eternal Beauty review – Sally Hawkins shines in audacious, offbeat triumph Summary: Writer-director Craig Roberts has created a thoughtful, valuable, humane drama about mental illness. The setting is a British suburbia around the 1980 …
Working Men's Club review – synthpop of every stripe on outstanding debut LP The Golden Lion pub in Todmorden gives locals the chance to meet and talk about the high number of UFO sightings in the isolated West Yorkshire town. …
RLPO/Petrenko review – maximum impact for bold start to virtual season The Royal Liverpool Philharmonic’s autumn season in its home base is a mixture of online-only performances and concerts with socially distanced audien …
The Boys in the Band review – fierce fun and games in the pre-Aids era Hammy and stagey and campy it might be, but The Boys in the Band turns out to have a fiercely watchable soap-operatic intensity, a sustained attack of …
Why Radiohead are the Blackest white band of our times Ask anyone who is the Blackest white rock band to emerge over the past 30 years, and my hunch is that few would say Radiohead. The hypnotically wonky …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Sam Smith, James Blake, Justin Bieber Sam Smith Diamonds Diamonds is told from inside an acrimonious breakup: the messy enmeshing of love and finances. “Take all the money you want from me …
Dick Johnson Is Dead review – a startling confrontation with death Kirsten Johnson is the cinematographer and film-maker who in 2016 created, or curated, Cameraperson, an arresting, dreamlike collage of material that …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 2 to 9 October Elias Quartet Leamington Music returns in a new venue. Beethoven is the common denominator between the Elias Quartet’s two programmes: in their late a …
Actor Rick Moranis punched in the street in random attack The Ghostbusters and Honey, I Shrunk the Kids star Rick Moranis has been the victim of a street attack in New York City. Footage shows the 67-year-old …
No Time to Die: Bond 25 pushed back again to spring 2021 The next James Bond thriller, No Time to Die, has been delayed yet again as a result of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. The 25th instalment of the s …
One to watch: Wesley Joseph Since emerging earlier this year with his self-produced debut single, the skittering, jazz-flecked Imaginary Friends, 23-year-old rapper-singer Wesley …
The Trial of the Chicago 7 review – timely courtroom drama Summary: The events explored in this electrifying courtroom drama – the trial of a high-profile group of defendants on charges relating to anti-Vietnam protest …
Diana Krall: This Dream of You review – second to none The song is But Beautiful. Diana Krall sings the first chorus and then comes a guitar solo. As it begins, a string orchestra joins in, playing the mel …
How a TV baseball movie inspired late Lennon love song A month before he was shot dead in December 1980, John Lennon recorded the song Grow Old With Me, its lyrics drawn from a Robert Browning poem. Inspir …
On the Rocks review – deadpan Bill Murray on fine form Summary: “You’re mine until you get married,” says Bill Murray’s instantly recognisable voice in the opening of this bittersweet tale of fathers and daughters, …
Samantha Morton apologises on radio for knife threat to girl when she was 14 The English actress Samantha Morton, star of the hit television series Harlots and The Walking Dead, has publicly apologised for threatening the life …
Blue Note Re:imagined – a rollercoaster tribute Jazz players frequently hold hands across the generations. This 16-track compilation finds today’s youthful, often London-based renaissance in dialogu …
Radha Blank: ‘Failure is a great  tool in comedy’ There’s a moment in The Forty-Year-Old Version when frustrated playwright Radha becomes so enraged by an elderly white theatre producer that she has t …
Eternal Beauty review – a bold but jarring sketch of schizophrenia Summary: Cinema has not always had the most sympathetic relationship with mental illness: all too frequently it’s used as a threat or a device to explain a thi …
Jónsi: Shiver review – ethereal steel for strange times Twenty-six years into an experimental career where he’s still generally thought of as the indie boy Enya, Jónsi Birgisson has recruited a 30-year-old …
Less hotel, more gentrified flophouse: The Albion Rooms, Margate – review At some point we’re going to have to confront the idea of whether the Libertines’ new venture The Albion Rooms is a hotel or not, so we may as well do …
A Journey Through the Rake’s Progress review – whistle-stop tour of Stravinsky Summary: Who knows – this potted version of The Rake’s Progress, produced by Blackheath Halls Opera, might just start a fashion for similarly abbreviated onlin …
Music festivals plan for phased return in 2021 after Covid wipeout Summary: Thermo scanners, interactive wristbands that vibrate to mark a lack of social distancing, and rapid on-site testing are all being considered by music …
Melanie C: Melanie C review – a genuine statement Pop stars love to say they’re finally “the real me”, although the declaration often straddles some pretty generic music. Melanie C’s eighth album feel …
'I don't want another blockbuster!' How Phyllida Lloyd is following up Mamma Mia! and The Iron Lady ‘Black widow.” With this code-phrase from her mum, a little girl runs to the corner shop. In the kitchen at home, her dad is attacking her mum after f …
Miller's Crossing at 30: the Coen brothers' unknowable gangster drama When Miller’s Crossing was released 30 years ago, there emerged two competing camps on the Coen brothers, who had previously written and directed the …
The Forty-Year-Old Version and the radical optimism of black cinema “I’ve been working on this social commentary about the white gaze’s eroticism of black pain,” says struggling playwright and would-be rapper Radha Bla …
Time to try harder – James Bond has no licence to kill the film industry Our movie industry was just about keeping its morale steady. It was enforcing perfectly workable rules on sanitising and physical distancing and not s …
Pillow Queens: 2020's most exciting indie-rockers on Catholicism, coming out and community When I meet Dublin band Pillow Queens in a pub and pizza place in the city in August, the conversation ranges from the city’s housing crisis to the ca …
Wigmore Hall announce lockdown commissions: 'we want new voices' Summary: The Wigmore Hall today announces a search for new voices to offer their perspective on this extraordinary year. The central London concert hall is lau …
Belarus: filmmakers capture personal stories from a country in turmoil Our latest Guardian Documentary is an unusual collaboration. Three independent Belarusian film-makers reacted to the country-wide protests by turning …
Tenet didn't just fail to save cinema – it may well have killed it for good Releasing his lowest-grossing film since 2006’s The Prestige was probably not on Christopher Nolan’s agenda for 2020, but then nobody has had exactly …
Total legend: does Mariah Carey really not ‘do stairs’? Last week Mariah Carey finally released her long-awaited memoir, The Meaning of Mariah Carey (unfortunately she used the better title, Memoirs of an I …
Plagiarism case over Led Zeppelin's Stairway to Heaven finally ends Summary: Led Zeppelin have prevailed in a long-standing copyright battle over their signature song, Stairway to Heaven. The US supreme court has declined to he …
'You're left to rot if you speak up': the abuse faced by female roadies Sandwich-maker. Foot-rubber. Mother. Eye candy. Enabler. Subordinate. Weakling. Women and non-binary (NB) touring crew members have heard it all while …
From James Bond to Marvel: can Hollywood survive a year without blockbusters? Few of us will be able to recall a time when the words “Coming soon to a cinema near you” were not part of our cultural vocabulary. What a difference …
London film festival opens as a 'symbol of resistance' This year’s BFI London film festival is a symbol of resistance for an industry that has been “absolutely battered” by the Covid-19 crisis, according t …
Akira review – apocalyptic anime's startling message of global annihilation A deeply strange message from the future is what this movie is here to (re)deliver: both post- and pre-apocalyptic, a nuclear-age parable of anxiety t …
Mallrat, Powderfinger, Flowerkid and Cry Club: Australia's best new music for October Summary: Powderfinger – Day By Day For fans of: Powderfinger! Like Bernard Fanning’s happiness, Powderfinger have spent this year slowly creeping back (into th …
Why Netflix is a lifeline for African film-makers ‘Have you ever had someone tell your story, take your voice … and replace your face until no one else can see or hear you?” These are the powerful wor …
Netflix indicted by Texas grand jury over 'lewd visual material' in Cuties Netflix has defended the controversial film Cuties after it emerged the streaming giant is facing a criminal charge in Texas over the movie’s allegedl …
Debussy: where to start with his music Summary: It was a description he always rejected, but Claude Debussy (1862-1918) is often thought of as an impressionist, a musical equivalent to Monet or Reno …
Cardi B apologises for supporting Armenia fundraiser after backlash She has taken on fellow pop stars Nicki Minaj, Miley Cyrus and Azealia Banks in high-profile feuds. But confrontational rapper Cardi B is backing down …
7 Hours on Earth review –  schoolkids have fun with aliens-meet-Shakespeare comedy Attack the Block meets A Midsummer Night’s Dream in this good-natured, charming and energetic comedy made by staff and pupils at Graveney secondary sc …
'James McAvoy will be doing the detective work': is My Son the future of film? One of the biggest thrills of screen detectives is the knowledge that you are watching someone much smarter than you. When Sherlock Holmes vanishes in …
'I used to do the piracy': memories of an 80s Wolverhampton video rental shop Summary: Dawinder Bansal is trying to pinpoint exactly when she realised that she’d been part of a criminal enterprise. Aged eight, she’d taken on some work fo …
Bunny 'Striker' Lee, Jamaican reggae producer, dies aged 79 Jamaican producer Bunny “Striker” Lee, who helped cultivate rhythms of reggae and dub working with many of the island’s biggest stars, has died aged 7 …
Spontaneous review – bloody high-school horror hits raw nerve Surely somebody somewhere, is writing a PhD thesis right now on existential nihilism, self-harm and postmodern horror in American YA fiction, TV and f …
Anne Heche: stigma around relationship with Ellen DeGeneres cost me huge movie deal The actor Anne Heche has claimed that the stigma attached to going public with her relationship with Ellen DeGeneres in the late 1990s led to her blac …
Totally Under Control review – shocking film on Trump's failure to handle Covid-19 Making a documentary that endeavors to tell the story of the coronavirus pandemic presents a litany of unique inherent challenges. To wit: the prepond …
Eddie Van Halen obituary The death of Eddie Van Halen from throat cancer, aged 65, brings to a close one of the most colourful and lucrative sagas in American rock music. If A …
How do you feel about UK cinemas closing during the Covid pandemic? From the glow of the projector to the smell of the popcorn, the communal experience of going to the cinema has long been part of its attraction. But t …
Cats & Dogs: Paws Unite! review – unfunny third instalment of the pet-centric yarn Summary: Cats & Dogs: Paws Unite! comes, 10 years on, cold on the heels of its predecessor, 2010’s Cats & Dogs: The Revenge of Kitty Galore – which was itself …
'It’s not a question of belief': the film examining government UFO records The question of unexplained phenomena and Unidentified Flying Objects have long fascinated the public, as the subject of feverish American news covera …
'We will survive, we just need movies' says Vue cinema boss Summary: The boss of the UK’s third largest cinema chain has a simple solution to the industry’s Covid-19 crisis. “We will survive, we just need movies,” says …
The games children play: why we let kids take over our film The new Guardian documentary No Ball Games celebrates the resourceful, optimistic energy of kids and their determination to find fun in every corner o …
The Cineworld effect: UK cinema closures deliver body blow to Bollywood Coverage of Cineworld’s decision to temporarily close all of its UK cinemas has, understandably, focused on the impact on employees and potential long …
Peter Sarsgaard: 'People like the bad guy. It's distasteful but it's human nature' Unlike many actors, Peter Sarsgaard got some work during lockdown: an 11-minute short, shot by his wife, Maggie Gyllenhaal, on their rural estate in V …
Yield to the Night review – unforgettable death-row drama starring Diana Dors J Lee Thompson’s gripping capital punishment drama Yield to the Night from 1956 gets a re-release: a Brit noir classic and a unique career achievement …
D-Block Europe: The Blueprint – Us vs Them review – UK rap stars box themselves in Last year, Young Adz, one half of D-Block Europe, claimed that the Lewisham duo had amassed a cache of 700 unreleased tracks. On the face of it, that …
Johnny Nash obituary Summary: In the decades since the song I Can See Clearly Now was written and recorded by Johnny Nash, many have used its uplifting lyrics to help themselves ou …
Saint Maud review – nursing a nightmare of erotic intimacy Last year, Morfydd Clark appeared in Armando Iannucci’s new version of David Copperfield playing both David’s mother and the woman he’s in love with – …
Bournemouth SO/Brabbins review – energy, panache and a rarity discovered The Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra’s chief conductor Kirill Karabits comes from Ukraine, and during his tenure on the south coast he has made a point …
Monteverdi: L'Orfeo review –  Toro brings expressive colour but extremes of tempo A decade ago, new recordings of the earliest of all operatic masterpieces seemed almost commonplace, but this studio recording of Monteverdi’s favola …
'If Bond moves again, it's armageddon': seven experts on the future of the film industry ‘The room was already on fire; Covid just poured lighter fluid around the house’ Steven Gaydos, executive VP of content, Variety We’re at a tipping po …
UK independent cinemas boom as multiplexes close doors Summary: Multiplexes may be closing their doors or reducing their hours but it is not all doom and gloom in the world of cinema. Box offices at many independen …
My streaming gem: why you should watch I Don't Feel at Home in This World Anymore 2020 has been a long nightmare of a year, one that has constantly defied the rules of time and space in terms of how much bad stuff can happen in such …
Kajillionaire review –  stylish band of scammers do the trick Miranda July floats you along on a cloud of weightless, dreamy inconsequentiality in this deader-than-deadpan comedy, shot in a hard, blank, bleachy L …
'We lost ourselves': Future Islands, the synthpop band who nearly blew it Summary: “I’ve definitely done some journaling up here,” says Samuel T Herring. “A lot of lyrics too. It’s a great place for letting the mind wander.” We’re sa …
If cinemas survive this movie drought, 2021 will see a flood of blockbusters In a world where absolutes are increasingly hard to find, one thing is certain: in 2021 there are going to be a hell of a lot of sci-fi, fantasy and s …
I Am Woman review - Helen Reddy biopic sings flat Summary: There’s a taste of turkey, or a can of own-brand mechanically reclaimed turkey-substitute, in this moderate TV-movie-style biopic of Helen Reddy, the …
Venom Prison: Primeval review – potent disgust from Welsh death metallers With their gleefully hardcore, socially astute take on death metal, Venom Prison have been responsible for some of the most energising extreme music o …
'Open that door or I'll blow it down!' The jazz legends who caused TV mayhem Fifty years ago this week, all hell broke loose on Dick Cavett’s US talkshow. The host was interviewing the British actor Trevor Howard before a live …
Christopher Eccleshall obituary Summary: My father, Chris Eccleshall, who has died aged 72, was one of the world’s leading designers and makers of guitars, and the go-to repairer for many wel …
In dialogue with Mozart: composer's violin brought back to life When he first dared ask the keepers of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s violin if he might be allowed to try it out, Christoph Koncz had no idea where the qu …
Why Kanye West's fight for his masters marks a changing music industry Summary: In September, Kanye West took to Twitter to declare the music industry (and NBA) “modern day slave ships”, as he sought to regain the rights to his ma …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 9 to 16 October Summary: In the Market for Love First staged outdoors two months ago, Glyndebourne now takes its production of Offenbach’s farcical one-acter into the opera ho …
Mohammad Reza Shajarian embodied the timeless beauty of Persian music I vividly remember the first time I met Mohammad Reza Shajarian on a summer afternoon in Berlin in 2011. He was touring Europe, along with his daughte …
The War with Grandpa review: De Niro slums in delayed ex-Weinstein farce For a film as cursed as family comedy The War with Grandpa, shot back in 2017 then sidelined and sold as a result of Harvey Weinstein’s downfall, it’s …
Blake Scott: Niscitam review – Peep Tempel frontman's sprawling and powerful solo debut A pub-punk frontman known for acerbic character studies, Blake Scott specialises in prodding and puncturing the clichés of Australian culture. After a …
At the drive-in: has Hockey Dad revealed the future of Australian live music? Summary: If drive-in concerts could make enough of a buck for concert promoters to pursue them (they can’t), Wollongong band the Pinheads’ appeal on Friday to …
Streaming: the best films about doppelgängers and shifting identities Some films are best watched more or less by accident: stumbled upon with little foreknowledge, so we’re led through the story without a compass. Mubi’ …
Kajillionaire review – quirky crime caper A family of oddball grifters living on the margins of Los Angeles begin to fracture after they befriend the comparatively normal Melanie (a magnetic G …
Crisis at the box office: Australian cinemas teeter on Covid cliffhanger Months after the initial Covid-19 restrictions closed all cinemas, Australian moviegoers are beginning to return for socially distanced screenings acr …
The Forty-Year-Old Version review – razor-sharp satire According to talent agent Archie (Peter Kim), “women of colour directors are hot right now”. Writer, director and star Radha Blank knows this (she won …
Ariyon Bakare: ‘Everything has fallen into place’ Across a table in the bar of a Paddington hotel, conversation turns to home. “I lived all over London,” says the actor Ariyon Bakare. “I grew up in Le …
Emmy the Great: April / 月音 review – a quest for belonging There’s both pathos and power in not quite belonging to any one place: born and raised in Hong Kong, Emma-Lee Moss found fame in London before moving …
Future Islands: As Long As You Are review – intensely moving If there’s one moment that Baltimore synth-poppers Future Islands are likely to be remembered for, it’s frontman Samuel T Herring’s brilliantly impass …
Vue to shut a quarter of UK cinemas three days a week Summary: A quarter of Vue’s UK cinemas are to shut three days a week in an effort to reduce costs after delays in the release of a string of blockbusters. The …
Ultraviolence: the shocking, brutal film about deaths in police custody It has taken 19 years for Ken Fero to complete the follow-up to Injustice, his unforgettable film about deaths in police custody. But perhaps the surp …
Deep Purple's Ian Gillan at 75: 'I can't pole vault any more!' Summary: You might think Ian Gillan, at 75 years old, would be fed up with singing Smoke on the Water. After all, he’s had to sing it at pretty much every show …
Jackie Shipster obituary Summary: My wife, Jackie Shipster, who has died aged 70, was an actor, pianist and music teacher, who used singing to help those with dementia and brain injury …
The Wanted singer Tom Parker diagnosed with inoperable brain tumour Tom Parker, singer with chart-topping British boyband the Wanted, has been diagnosed with an inoperable brain tumour. The 32-year-old said he was “sti …
Margaret Nolan - actor, artist and Goldfinger title sequence star - dies aged 76 Margaret Nolan, the actor best known for appearing in the title sequence for Goldfinger and for a string of appearances in TV shows in the 1960s and 7 …
Cinemas 'shocked and dismayed' by Disney decision to launch Soul on streaming Cinemas across Europe have expressed their outrage at the decision by Hollywood studio Disney to bypass a big-screen release for the new Pixar animati …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Beauties of the Night Goddesses of the stage and the screen, the Mexican vedettes or showgirls of the 1970s and 1980s were the embodiment of the era’s female beauty ideal a …
Welcome to the Blumhouse: Nocturne/Evil Eye review – dark desires Kicking off the second batch of Welcome to the Blumhouse, the horror outfit’s collaboration with Amazon, Nocturne (★★★★☆) is played firmly in the key …
In the Market for Love review – first-rate singers elevate flimsy one-acter The sound of tuning from an orchestra pit has never been so welcome as it currently is in Glyndebourne. In August this was one of the first UK opera c …
Aria awards 2020: Lime Cordiale, Tame Impala and Sampa the Great lead nominations Summary: Pop duo Lime Cordiale, one-man band Tame Impala and hip-hop powerhouse Sampa the Great are set for a promising awards season, with each raking in mult …
BTS faces China backlash over Korean war comments K-pop phenomenon BTS are facing a barrage of criticism in China after the South Korean boyband cited their country’s solidarity with the US stemming f …
Isabella Rossellini: ‘Ageing brings a lot of happiness. You get fatter – but there is freedom’ Isabella Rossellini is a busy woman. It is hard to know how the model, actor, writer, animal behaviourist and farmer finds so much time to talk about …
'We lived a life of terror': bassist Leon Bosch on making his peace with South Africa As a person of colour growing up in South Africa in the 1970s, double bass player Leon Bosch was scarred physically and mentally by the country’s apar …
'They refused to act': inside a chilling documentary on Trump's bungled Covid-19 response In May, as their city began to emerge from the paralyzing grip of coronavirus that killed over 33,000 residents, New York City-based film-makers Alex …
'Cinema brings hope in a way laptops cannot': what readers miss most about the movies ‘If cinema doesn’t survive, the Tories will have shattered a diamond of culture’ Tom Houlton, 27, actor, Suffolk I have been a Cineworld Unlimited cus …
Soul review – Pixar's rapturous tale of a jazz nut on a surreal out-of-body journey Here is Pixar’s charming, bewildering and beautiful new animation about life after death and life before death – and that title incidentally reminds y …
Midnight Oil win Sydney Peace Foundation's gold medal for human rights Australian band Midnight Oil will be awarded the gold medal for human rights by the Sydney Peace Foundation for its “commitment to the pursuit of huma …
‘Loud and proud, wrong and strong’: the ‘Yolŋu surf rock’ of Yothu Yindi’s next generation The music of Yothu Yindi, says King Stingray guitarist Roy Kellaway, is in his blood. He and the brand new band’s singer, Yirrnga Yunupiŋu, grew up to …
Stevie Nicks on art, ageing and attraction: ‘Botox makes it look like you’re in a satanic cult!’ Stevie Nicks has been taking the pandemic even more seriously than most. She has barely left her home in Los Angeles this year. “My assistant, God ble …
The Kid Detective review – cutesy crime caper takes a dark left turn Within the framework of any good mystery is a well-modulated supply of red herrings, designed to wrongfoot us and the detective we’re watching, ideall …
Governments are failing Black students – and rappers are picking up the slack This week, US rapper Megan Thee Stallion launched the Don’t Stop scholarship in partnership with Amazon Music, giving two women of colour $10,000 each …
Gal Gadot as Cleopatra is a backwards step for Hollywood representation Cleopatra is once again getting the big screen treatment, this time courtesy of Wonder Woman director Patty Jenkins and the DC heroine herself, Gal Ga …
Being a Human Person review – the Monty Pythonesque artistry of Roy Andersson The amazing artistry of 77-year-old Swedish director Roy Andersson is illuminated in this tribute, a documentary that follows the work on his latest f …
The Devil Has a Name review - fire-breathing thriller about a farmer taking on Big Oil Edward James Olmos is an actor-film-maker with a long history of advocating for Latino screen representation, and he has cast himself as something of …
Idles v Fat White Family: what the indie showdown tells us about class On the face of it, two British indie bands being locked in a war of words about class-consciousness might seem like egoistic farce. On deeper consider …
Legacy of Lies review –  sappy action thriller undone by lack of smarts Acting talent is largely neither here nor there when it comes to low-budget action thrillers: what makes the difference is a script that’s smart enoug …
Million-pound question: why save Secret Cinema while real cinemas are in ruins? Film fans experienced a collective meltdown on Monday when it was revealed that Secret Group, the company behind immersive movie experience Secret Cin …
2067 review – Kodi Smit-McPhee is the chosen one in aspirational but cliched climate sci-fi There is a genre of sci-fi movies that prioritises a resourceful kind of deception: tricking the audience with high-end looks manufactured from low bu …
Mafia Inc review – old-school gangster pic based on real Canadian milieu This unexpectedly absorbing gangster movie is based on a nonfiction book of the same name by André Cédilot and André Noël that delved into Montreal’s …
Elton John and ex-wife Renate Blauel settle legal dispute Summary: Sir Elton John and his ex-wife, Renate Blauel, have settled a legal case brought after details of the marriage were featured in the singer’s memoir an …
Dance music platform Resident Advisor defends £750,000 government grant A dance music website and events company that will receive £750,000 as part of the government’s arts support grant scheme has defended its application …
K-Pop band BTS scores huge hit on South Korea stock market in management firm's IPO Summary: The management company behind the popular South Korean boy band BTS has scored a huge hit on the country’s stock market after its shares doubled on th …
Rebecca review – overdressed and underpowered romantic thriller The star is the suit. Armie Hammer’s three-piece is an outrageous showstopper that upstages everything and everyone in its bold shade of Colman’s-must …
'It's like slavery' – Time, the shocking film about a family torn apart by the US jail industry ‘This system breaks you apart. It is designed just like slavery to tear you apart. And instead of using the whip, they use mother time … The experienc …
Blood and Money review – grizzled wilderness thriller Cinematographer turned director John Barr serves up a generic thriller: the title lets you know that what you’ve got on the label is what you’ve got i …
Over the Moon review – Netflix family animation is more Disney than Disney Watch your back, Disney; here comes Netflix in Hollywood studio mode, flexing its ambition with an animated family fantasy adventure about a sunny, 13 …
Gorillaz: Song Machine Season One: Strange Timez review –  the poignant sound of social distancing Damon Albarn and Jamie Hewlett’s Gorillaz project has sold tens of millions of albums, spawned No 1 singles, broken America in a way no Britpop band ( …
MPs to examine impact of streaming on future of music industry MPs are to investigate the impact that music streaming is having on artists, record labels and the sustainability of the music industry. The Commons d …
Carmilla review – clever but bloodless spin on classic female-vampire yarn Summary: This revisionist adaptation of Sheridan Le Fanu’s 1871 vampire novella joins Andrea Arnold’s Wuthering Heights and Lady Macbeth in the newish traditio …
Beabadoobee: 'I want to be that girl I needed when I was 15' On the face of it, Beatrice Laus’s success looks like the plot of a far-fetched movie, the kind of thing knocked together by Netflix in the hope of sn …
Mac Davis obituary Summary: Mac Davis’s name will always be associated with Elvis Presley, since Davis wrote Presley’s dramatic and politically charged 1969 comeback hit In the G …
Clara Iannotta: Earthing review – compelling new music with bells and whistles on ‘String quartet” seems a rather reductive way of describing any of the four utterly compelling works by Clara Iannotta that the Jack Quartet play here …
Sacha Baron Cohen's films – ranked! Summary: 15. Grimsby (2016) This is one for Sacha Baron Cohen, his professional associates, his fans and all of humanity to forget. The idea is that he plays a …
Demi Lovato has made the most damning protest song of the Trump era How do you solve a problem like Donald? Like Nixon, Reagan and Thatcher before him, President Trump has been a great catalyst for protest in the arts …
Body of Water review – one wedding, and a sobering take on eating disorders Body of Water is a sombre, painful British movie from first-time feature director Lucy Brydon. I’m still not sure what I think about this film’s overa …
Skepta, JME, Julie ... are the Adenugas Britain's most creative family? Skepta, JME, Julie and Jason – the four Adenuga siblings – are laughing as they remember building a go-kart as kids, raiding the factory next door for …
Peter Frampton: 'I was kept high. If I needed cocaine, he made sure I had it' Peter Frampton recalls with stinging clarity the moment in 1976 when he realized his career was about to take a perilous turn. “I realized that instea …
Time review –  heroic dignity and high emotion in battle to free a jailed husband This is a viscerally emotional documentary about Sibil Fox Richardson, an African-American woman from New Orleans who almost two decades ago began a p …
'There's a whole war going on': the film tracing a decade of cyber-attacks In early 2010, scientists at a uranium enrichment plant in Natanz, Iran, watched their infrastructure malfunction at an unprecedented, inexplicable ra …
Dog Soldiers review – gory larks with furry werewolves Out in time for Halloween, writer-director Neil Marshall’s tidily assembled, witty and cheerfully gory horror flick from 2002 gets a rerelease. And ho …
Autechre: Sign review – electronic masters soar and fall in negative space As the devastating and the downright uncanny both become normalised, few things still have the power to surprise in 2020. That said, few would have ex …
Carla Bruni's teenage obsessions: 'Francis Bacon shows our confusion, desire, madness' The Clash As a teenager in Paris all I wanted was travel, freedom and independence. I started working [in modelling] right after my high school exam a …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 16-23 October Weekend recitals at Snape Steven Osborne plays Rachmaninov, Alina Ibragimova performs an all-Bach programme for solo violin, and there’s Bach French S …
Her dork materials: how Sasha Sloan turned Reddit into songwriting glory Summary: Singer-songwriter Sasha Sloan has a confession to make. “I don’t really listen to music,” she says on the phone from Nashville. “I just listen to stan …
I'm Your Woman review – 70s thriller goes from marvelous to middling There’s an odd startle to the opening scene of the 70s-set Amazon thriller I’m Your Woman, as a lounging housewife is met with an unusual surprise. Je …
Streaming: the best films exploring black British lives One of the few good things to be said about this very bad year is that by the time Black History Month came around at the start of October, it didn’t …
Johnny Flynn: 'I feel I need to do things with urgency' Summary: He’s an actor equipped with “weapons grade animal magnetism” (according to the Observer’s critic Mark Kermode). Over the past decade or so, he has ste …
The Divine Comedy review – reassuringly civilised “Hey!” ejaculates the Divine Comedy’s Neil Hannon, waving his hands, “it’s … a gig!” We all know how he feels; personally, it’s my first time back in …
Being a Human Person review – unexpectedly moving Summary: The Swedish director of A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence, Roy Andersson has always been a distinctive voice in European cinema. Disint …
Vincent Peirani and Emile Parisien: Abrazo review – delightful and astonishing The soprano saxophone has a sound that can switch in an instant from light and airy to bleak and lonely. The accordion is so full of potential sounds …
Time review – poetic documentary about a family torn apart by prison Summary: The idea that the mass incarceration of African Americans is in effect a modern form of slavery has been explored in several powerful documentaries, r …
James Bond filmmakers receive millions in UK tax credits, report finds From Miss Moneypenny to Q, James Bond has long relied upon a series of government officials. Now it has emerged that Her Majesty’s most famous secret …
Beabadoobee: Fake It Flowers review – shiny, vulnerable retro pop London bedroom pop sensation Bea Kristi – aka Beabadoobee – takes her cues from the off-kilter indie guitars of a quarter-century ago, in much the sam …
François Ozon: 'Young people now don’t have the inhibitions older actors did' French writer-director François Ozon, 52, is famous for his prodigious output. He directed his first full-length feature, Sitcom, in 1998, and his 19t …
Uncle Vanya review – coronavirus gives Chekhov a shot in the arm Here is an extraordinary, transfiguring leap from stage to screen. Ian Rickson’s production of Uncle Vanya was cut short by lockdown in the final week …
Rebecca review – perfectly watchable romp It’s not an obvious meeting of material and film-maker, but Ben Wheatley’s Netflix-produced adaptation of Daphne du Maurier’s Rebecca is a perfectly w …
Carmilla review – blood lust and mystery mark a superior gothic drama An atmospheric gothic-tinged period drama, this adaptation of an 1872 novella by Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu flirts with vampiric blood lust but is most s …
4/4 review – a powerhouse of a programme from the Royal Opera The Royal Opera opened its doors to its first post-lockdown live audience for 4/4, a quartet of staged vocal works, none of them originally intended f …
Dorian Electra: My Agenda review – frenetic, pummelling protest-pop Over the last few years pop songs have shortened, curtailed by the whims of streaming services and algorithms. It’s a trend that gender-fluid alt-pop …
Rhonda Fleming obituary It would be difficult for filmgoers now to appreciate the impact that Technicolor had on audiences during and after the second world war, and how cert …
Sigur Rós criticise 'unjust' second trial for Icelandic tax evasion Summary: The Icelandic post-rock band Sigur Rós have claimed they face financial ruin or even jail following an “unjust and draconian” second prosecution for t …
The streaming startups trying to save the music industry mid-pandemic Two decades ago, digital technology pulled the record business inside out, a shock from which it has only recently recovered. But in 2020 it is helpin …
Home discomforts: why haunted-house horrors are making a comeback Summary: Not now, haunted house horrors! Never has the prospect of watching a movie about being confined to your home and beset by unseen terrors seemed less l …
How can Furiosa expand on Max Max: Fury Road's brutal feminist polemic? What a terrible time it must be to be a men’s rights activist. Not only is Donald Trump lagging behind by as much as 17 points in the polls, but the # …
Acid, nudity and sci-fi nightmares: why Hawkwind were the radicals of 1970s rock Early evening, 13 July 1972, and something strange and rather wonderful is about to happen. On the previous edition of Top of the Pops, David Bowie ha …
Yippee Ki YAAAy: Bruce Willis plugs Die Hard car batteries Summary: In a way – in the smallest, saddest way imaginable – we should probably be quite grateful to Bruce Willis. Because in a year packed beyond words with …
Linda Ronstadt: 'I had to sing those songs or I was going to die' From the start of her career, Linda Ronstadt has talked to the media about her Mexican heritage. “Back in 1967, Tiger Beat magazine asked me what my a …
José Padilla, Ibiza DJ who defined chillout music, dies aged 64 José Padilla, the Spanish DJ who helped define chillout music in the 1990s, has died aged 64 from colon cancer. An update on his Facebook page reads: …
'I don’t sleep. I'm afraid to open the post': Covid's continued effect for film industry workers The response to our callout in March for the experiences of people working in the film industry affected by the growing coronavirus crisis was overwhe …
Antrum review – creepy 'cursed film' mockumentary emanates eerie power You probably haven’t heard of Antrum, such is the dread and secrecy that surrounds this “cursed film”. And that’s for your own good. Antrum was made i …
Mirwais on producing Madonna: 'I'm not comparing her to a bull but –' Mirwais Ahmadzaï is trying to sum up his frequent collaborator Madonna. “You know bullfighting?” he begins ominously. “It works because the bull is so …
Spencer Davis, bandleader with the Spencer Davis Group, dies aged 81 Summary: Spencer Davis, who as bandleader with the Spencer Davis Group topped the UK charts twice in the mid-60s, has died aged 81 while being treated for pneu …
Baby Done review – Rose Matafeo is wonderful in irresistible film about parenthood During an early moment in director Curtis Vowell’s very enjoyable and sassy New Zealand comedy Baby Done, the protagonist, Zoe (Rose Matafeo), articul …
Charlie Ainley obituary Summary: My father, Charlie Ainley, who has died aged 72, was a singer-songwriter who achieved success in the 1970s with his band Charlie and the Wideboys. The …
Frida Kahlo review - portrait of the intriguing Mexican painter Having gone quiet for a few months since lockdown, the reliably informative Exhibition on Screen series returns with a profile of Frida Kahlo, the Mex …
Everyman cinema staff say Covid-19 lay offs have left them in limbo Staff at the Everyman cinema chain have complained about being left in limbo by the company’s use of “lay off” to stand down 400 employees until audie …
'This would have changed my career': music industry finally acts on artist mental health Summary: In 2016, Lauren Aquilina released her first album. The same day, she left the music industry, vowing never to return. The pressures of burgeoning fame …
The Climb review –   hilarious true-to-life bromance I laughed hysterically during the first scene of The Climb, Michael Angelo Covino’s brilliantly original indie bromance. The setting is France, where …
Max Winslow and the House of Secrets review – lightweight Wonka-esque movie puzzle Targeting the demographic intersection between geeky YA fiction readers, folks interested in psychology that doesn’t go much deeper than an internet q …
One Man and His Shoes review – the heartbreaking rise and fall of Air Jordans This is a documentary that only seems to wake up to its own tragic significance once it is nearly all over. Most of the time it is a celebratory accou …
Pianist Keith Jarrett unlikely to perform again after two strokes Keith Jarrett, the jazz and classical musician whose album The Köln Concert is one of the best-selling piano recordings in history, has announced that …
The Witches review – Roald Dahl reboot fails to cast the original's magic spell Who did Roald Dahl hate more: grownups or children? Kingsley Amis says that Dahl once told him to try writing for children and when Amis said his hear …
Rudy Giuliani faces questions after compromising scene in new Borat film The reputation of Rudy Giuliani could be set for a further blow with the release of highly embarrassing footage in Sacha Baron Cohen’s follow-up to Bo …
Paul McCartney to release new album recorded alone in lockdown Paul McCartney is to release a new album made entirely alone during lockdown. McCartney III comes out on 11 December and will become the third in a lo …
Borat Subsequent Moviefilm review – cinema's top troll goes baiting in Trump's US Borat’s first visit to the US happened in that impossibly distant, innocent time – 2006 – before social media, before smartphones, before the Iraq war …
Never Too Late review – Jack Thompson and Jacki Weaver star in escape-from-the-nursing-home romp Summary: Four elderly Vietnam veterans, who busted out of a PoW camp many moons ago, reunite in their twilight years for another daring mission: to escape from …
Don McLean on the tragedy behind American Pie: 'I cried for two years' When Don McLean was 15 years old, he had a premonition that his father was going to die. Distraught, he ran to tell his grandmother. “Don’t be ridicul …
Borat v Trump: can entertainment really affect an election? Even with the United States on red alert for pandemic containment, a pernicious phrase has been creeping into the public lexicon at an unprecedented r …
Honest Thief review - Liam Neeson does Taken once more with feeling Liam Neeson was 56 when Taken came out in 2008, launching his vengeful vigilante phase. Twelve years on, he’s still churning out serviceable action th …
Two By Two: Overboard! review – second helping of eye-frazzling Noah's ark yarn Although the first Two By Two film from 2015 was almost the cartoon equivalent of a war crime, this sequel is merely annoying for the most part, and e …
Bruce Springsteen: Letter to You review – his most Springsteen-esque album Bruce Springsteen’s 20th studio album reconvenes his most celebrated backing musicians, the E Street Band: ignoring 2014’s stopgap collection of cover …
Adele – every song ranked! 40. Now and Then (2008) Released on the flipside of 2008 single Cold Shoulder, Now and Then really sounds like a B-side. A gently wistful two-chord ac …
Bruckner: Symphonies Nos 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9 review – glorious performances make a worthy tribute Mariss Jansons died last November. During the final 15 years of his life he was the chief conductor of two of the world’s greatest orchestras, the Roy …
Julie Delpy's teen obsessions:  'Nastassja Kinski was my girl crush' Rumble Fish When I was a teenager I was very much into films – a little bit of music maybe, but mostly films. I went to the cinema a lot. I really lik …
Margaret Nolan obituary It would be wrong to dismiss the actor Margaret Nolan, who has died aged 76, as a passive decorative accompaniment to some of the cultural icons of th …
Marge Champion obituary The flashing legs and smiles of the energetic, witty husband-and-wife dancing duo Marge and Gower Champion were seen in seven movie musicals between 1 …
Raise Hell: The Life & Times of Molly Ivins review – memorial to a liberal legend The late journalist and media commentator Molly Ivins, an outspoken liberal from Texas, has an illustrious reputation among connoisseurs of political …
Josh Hartnett: 'People genuinely thought I'd been thrust on them' Josh Hartnett is sitting at home in Surrey, thinking about the time he was asked to play Superman. “I had this idea that because he lives in this worl …
Pixie review – Olivia Cooke radiates in Ireland-set drug-heist comedy Summary: Pixie is her name and trouble is her game. “She won’t just break you, she’ll take a Kalashnikov to your heart,” is the warning at the start of this he …
'It was like we'd gatecrashed someone else's party': how Britpop stars Menswear came apart at the seams Menswear are regaling me with tales from when they were the hottest new band in Britain. It was autumn 1994. Blur and Oasis had gone supernova and the …
Tenderlonious/Jaubi: Ragas from Lahore review – ancient source powers a jazz explorer Summary: Ever since the likes of John Coltrane, Yusef Lateef and Don Cherry came upon the tantric mantras of India and the harmonic and rhythmic forms of India …
The Secret Garden review – classic kids' tale gets lost in the undergrowth Summary: In these times of trial, no one could be blamed for a comfort-food yearning, a return to the Sunday teatime world of period drama reassurance featurin …
Ela Minus: Acts of Rebellion review – techno-pop for dancing, thinking and resisting As acts of rebellion go, Ela Minus’s is an intimate yet powerful one. On her debut album, the Colombia-born, Brooklyn-based artist makes personal-is-p …
Summer of 85 review – gay photolove drama with a dark edge François Ozon gives us a histrionic dose of photolove drama in this watchable if not especially profound young-love heartbreaker, which earnestly insi …
Tracks of the week reviewed: King Princess, Aya Nakamura, Little Mix King Princess Only Time Makes It Human When Mikaela Straus first appeared, it was hard to shake the sense that her music didn’t live up to her supreme …
The Ladykillers review – a comic crime caper that still kills It hardly makes sense to think of it as a rerelease, as the 1955 crime caper classic from Ealing Studios is perennially being revisited on screen, and …
Rapper SL: ‘When I was coming up, there was nobody else on my level’ You would be hard-pressed to find someone who raps more clearly than the 19-year-old SL. “If you rap slower, people take you in more, they understand …
The Kanneh-Mason Family review – varied programme gives each sibling a chance to shine At a time when most of us are spending more evenings in our living rooms than we’d ideally choose, here was the chance to pretend we were in someone e …
Grin and bear it: Jared Leto's Joker gets an unlikely second chance There is nothing wrong with an actor returning to a role that someone else has been cheerfully filling for a while, but it doesn’t always go well. Jus …
Helmut Newton: The Bad and the Beautiful review – not-so fawning fashion doc The intelligence and even-handedness of this documentary about the provocative fashion photographer Helmut Newton makes a change from the fawning tone …
Film-maker Alexandra Pelosi: 'I think phones are more dangerous than guns' Summary: America is, as the refrain goes, divided. This has been demonstrated empirically, with evidence on America’s increasing political polarization, and an …
Streaming: gems to explore from the London Korean film festival While cinemas continue to grapple with an uncertain pandemic-induced future, the film festival circuit has adjusted swiftly to the chaos. Recent weeks …
Don Hertzfeldt: the animator drawing devastating drama out of stick people Don Hertzfeldt is surprised to hear that viewers have been watching his last few short films – the three episodes of his miniature sci-fi epic World o …
Classical home listening: Ralph Vaughan Williams and a Rossini feast • When one composer, in this case Ralph Vaughan Williams (1872-1958), dedicates a major work to another, our curiosity is piqued: is the gesture one o …
Bruce Springsteen: Letter to You review –  a sledgehammer of succour While Bruce Springsteen was performing Springsteen on Broadway, the stage iteration of his 2016 memoir, his former teenage bandmate, George Theiss, wa …
One to watch: Lous and the Yakuza Gore, the title of Lous and the Yakuza’s debut album, is more philosophy than aesthetic. It represents Marie-Pierra Kakoma’s acceptance that the worst …
The Climb review – a shrewd portrayal of male friendship The Climb begins with heavy panting; it’s pitch dark. But writer-director (and lead actor) Michael Angelo Covino is teasing us: what appears to be a s …
Sun Ra Arkestra: Swirling review – out of this world Summary: For much of his long, prolific career, the late Sun Ra (born plain Herman Blount) found his music marginalised. Though rooted in jazz tradition, its a …
From the archive: Adam Ant stands and delivers, 1982 Maureen Cleave interviewed the man of the moment in the world of pop for the Observer Magazine of 10 January 1982 (‘The Ant Phenomenon’). ‘Adam Ant,’ …
Bail out our musicians or risk losing them for ever, say classical music stars Summary: Leading figures in classical music say many highly-trained orchestral musicians are giving up on music as they face homelessness and hunger this autum …
Dorset's art deco cinema jewel returns to its 1930s splendour It was the year of the abdication crisis, the Jarrow marches, the Battle of Cable Street and the launch of the BBC’s television service. Beyond Britai …
His House review – palpable terror British writer-director Remi Weekes’s arresting first feature smartly utilises the horror genre to explore the hostile environment experienced by Suda …
Gorillaz: Song Machine Season One: Strange Timez review – playful and potent collaboration The Now Now (2018) was one of those Gorillaz albums that dispensed with the hip hop-led collaborations that have often defined this band of ink and fl …
Swing out, sisters: the nuns singing through lockdown Social distancing and lockdown come naturally to the Poor Clares of Arundel in West Sussex: after all, they’ve been doing it for 800 years. “In our da …
Cordelia review – atmospheric but uneven thriller Summary: In Adrian Shergold’s uneven thriller, actor Cordelia (Antonia Campbell-Hughes) continues to suffer the aftershocks of trauma from an event that took p …
Honest Thief review – low-stakes thriller Summary: Liam Neeson is Tom Carter, AKA “the In and Out Bandit”, a bank robber who has swindled 12 banks in seven states, accruing $9m. Importantly, he’s “met …
Billie Eilish review – immersive adventure with fish and spiders Of all the online attempts to fill the gaping chasm where live music used to be before coronavirus, Billie Eilish’s livestream has attracted the most …
Royal Northern Sinfonia/Cottis – buoyant return with Mozart and an intriguing rarity The autumn season has started late for the Royal Northern Sinfonia – as it has for almost every British orchestra. But this weekend it embarked on an …
Girlhood: Girlhood review – breezy, 90s-tinged electropop Singer-songwriter Tessa Cavanna and producer Christian Pinchbeck first crossed paths in 2017. He heard her singing, so the story goes, when she walked …
Requiem for a Dream at 20: Aronofsky's nightmare still haunts I was 17, and just beginning university, when Requiem for a Dream descended on cinemas like an opaque, bruise-blue mist. Notwithstanding the no-under- …
Ammonite is not the evolutionary leap for lesbian film it thinks it is Summary: Lesbians have a love-hate relationship with cinema, a place in which, Andrea Weiss wrote in her 1992 work Vampires and Violets, only one image of the …
Oneohtrix Point Never: the warped genius behind Uncut Gems's spine-chilling score It has been a peculiar 2020 for many of us, but Daniel Lopatin’s has been odder than most. In January, the warped electronica that he makes under his …
Lyric Solitude review – imaginative and immaculate English Touring Opera was one of the British companies that reacted most quickly to the constraints of performing during Covid, and to rethink its aut …
Jerry Jeff Walker: the 'outlaw' songwriter who gave Mr Bojangles to the world Mr Bojangles become a standard as soon as it was first recorded in 1968. Nina Simone did a beautiful version. Bob Dylan did a dreadful version. Sammy …
Kazakh-American group claims Borat Subsequent Moviefilm 'incites violence' A group of Kazakh-Americans has demanded that Amazon withdraw Borat Subsequent Moviefilm, Sacha Baron Cohen’s new satirical comedy which – like its 20 …
The Craft: Legacy review – woke witchcraft sequel is smart but messy Released just seven months before Scream “saved” the horror genre from the doldrums of the 90s, spunky witchcraft chiller The Craft was often overlook …
No money to burn: how Bond crowdfunder could be the way forward If Covid kills the cinema experience for good – a hypothetical that sounds less and less far-fetched by the day – then No Time to Die will forever be …
Shut Up and Dance: the Hackney rap duo who raved against racism In British dance music history, the likes of Shoom, Spectrum and the Haçienda are often held up as the defining clubs from the scene’s formative years …
Spell review – hokey hoodoo horror missing a bit of magic In Halloween hoodoo horror Spell, protagonist Marquis is trying to escape a past of violence and poverty, a dogged struggle mirroring that of the film …
Elgar: where to start with his music If Britain has a national composer, it is Edward Elgar (1857-1934). His music is often seen as epitomising the smug Victorian world into which he was …
People You May Know review – data mining meets Christian fundamentalism If you like being shocked, creeped out and righteously infuriated by documentaries such as The Great Hack and The Social Dilemma that explain how our …
South of the River review – irritating account of a mockney rocker with cancer Here’s a charmless comedy drama set in Brixton, London, about the lead singer of a crap rock band (called the Undefined) who gets diagnosed with throa …
Song Without a Name review – heart-rending story of Peruvian baby trafficking This feature debut from Peruvian film-maker Melina Léon, first shown in the Directors’ Fortnight sidebar at last year’s Cannes film festival, is beaut …
Target Number One review – gritty thriller about Canadian junkie caught in Thai sting Pulpy, structurally a touch otiose, but eminently watchable throughout, this based-on-real-events crime drama tells two entwined stories. One is about …
Christiane Eda-Pierre obituary Summary: The soprano Christiane Eda-Pierre, who has died aged 88, was one of the first black opera singers to achieve an international reputation. A native of …
UK music industry study: diversity increase stalls at senior levels The senior levels of the UK music industry remain stubbornly white and male, with Black, Asian and minority ethnic employees making up only 19.9% of e …
Rams review – Sam Neill and Michael Caton's unpretentious sheep farmers will move ewe The poster for Rams depicts a perturbed-looking Michael Caton next to a smug-looking Sam Neill, both standing behind a sheep, which, like them, is sta …
Never-ending stories: from Bond to Galbraith, why is everything so long? About halfway through Tenet, the mind-frying Christopher Nolan film, I began to wriggle in my seat. Twenty minutes later, I had to sit on my hands to …
The Young Observant review – teenage kicks at prestigious Italian waiter school Summary: This film is avowedly a docu-fictional hybrid, for which director Davide Maldi has shot fly-on-the-wall nonfiction scenes at a prestigious Italian “si …
'Who is Jamie Webster?': the Liverpool hero who topped the first folk chart Jamie Webster is recalling the moment he became the first artist to top the newly created Official Folk Album Chart with his debut LP, We Get By. “I w …
Scariest ghosts in cinema – ranked! Summary: 20. Freddy Krueger in A Nightmare on Elm Street (1984) The jokey sequels may have turned Freddy into a lovable goof, but in Wes Craven’s original supe …
Phil Lynott: Songs for While I'm Away review – diverting glimpse of Thin Lizzy's poet star Phil Lynott was lead singer and bass guitarist of the 70s rock band Thin Lizzy, and is the star of this moderately interesting but very respectful and …
Midnight Oil: The Makarrata Project review – a chorus of anger over stolen land This mini-album, this “project”, may be the first new music from Midnight Oil in some two decades, but its genesis goes back almost two decades more, …
Dead review – stoner serial-killer comedy runs out of puff The ghost of a cop refuses to pass to the other side until he catches the serial killer responsible for his murder in this cheerfully silly low-budget …
'There's something to scream about': Bring Me the Horizon's pandemic political awakening In 2019, Oli Sykes foretold “some fuckin’ mental disaster in a couple of years … We’re literally at the end, doesn’t it feel like that to you?” He ima …
Hidden horrors: our writers on the scariest movies you (probably) haven't seen Ghost Stories The black horror comedy Ghost Stories is anthology of supernatural tales in the tradition of Ealing’s Dead Of Night – adapted by its dir …
African Apocalypse review – startling journey into Niger's heart of darkness Many real-life figures have been proposed as having inspired Heart of Darkness’s bloody outrider Kurtz, but this fascinating historical documentary-cu …
The fear within: 10 of the best scary films that aren’t horror movies Eraserhead Not all scary movies are horror films: here’s a selection that can give you goosebumps without resorting to gut-churning terror. David Lync …
M Huncho and Nafe Smallz: DNA review – dextrous chemistry deflated by familiar lyrical concerns M Huncho and Nafe Smallz have spent the last couple of years traversing the British rap scene as solo artists, scoring starry collaborations with the …
'When I travelled, I hid my passport': Fassbinder muse Barbara Sukowa on Hitler's legacy and hidden love Surely, I suggest to Barbara Sukowa – as she strolls around her garden in Brooklyn and I watch from 3,500 miles away on WhatsApp – it’s time lesbians …
Philharmonia/Rouvali review – bold programme that sparkled Nothing says “classical music in 2020” like a shrunken symphony orchestra scattered across a huge stage, silently rising to its feet as its conductor …
The Three Kings review – Scotland's managerial titans in the spotlight Summary: Though there’s quite a bit of familiar material on show here, this exercise in football nostalgia has an interesting, original focus: the three Scotti …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Middle Kids, Maxïmo Park, Lana Del Rey Summary: Middle Kids R U 4 Me? Even before the reign of TUT (These Unprecedented Times) it would have been mighty difficult to resist a song that opens with th …
Secrets of the Saqqara Tomb review – hidden depths in ancient Egypt Summary: The “secrets” here are in fact well known, having made headline news across the world in 2019: the discovery in the Saqqara necropolis, just outside C …
The return of McFly: will the cheeky pop-punkers finally get their due? The year is 2005, combat trousers inexplicably have tassels and chart music is groaning under the weight of reality TV winners and Crazy Frog. Tweens …
Johnny Depp and Amber Heard: reputations at stake as judgment looms It has been three months since the celebrity courtroom battle starring Johnny Depp and his ex-wife Amber Heard – containing serious and strenuously de …
A tale of two Hughs: Laurie and Grant reap the rewards of wisdom Perhaps you are having a top-notch 2020. Someone must be. But for the greater part of the population … not so much. Let us focus, therefore, on two we …
Wolfwalkers review – wolves take on Cromwell in bold Irish history tale Summary: Cartoon Saloon is the Kilkenny-based studio that has quietly engineered an upsurge in Irish-inflected animation: their 2009 debut feature The Secret o …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 1-7 November The Magic Flute Glyndebourne Touring Opera’s cut-down, semi-staged performances of Mozart’s Singspiel, directed by Donna Stirrup and sung in English. …
Michael Bay pandemic movie trailer criticized as 'exploitation cinema' For months, experts have hammered home a critical point: the US’s disastrous handling of the coronavirus pandemic – the testing debacle, the politiciz …
Behind closed doors: does love and isolation make Bartók’s Bluebeard the opera for our times? We all know Bluebeard. From Jane Eyre to Kubrick’s The Shining, his castle has become shorthand for a place where dark secrets lurk behind locked door …
Vote your cast: who is the greatest fictional US president? Remember that lurch in your stomach when you realised that Donald Trump had been elected as US president? Not to bum anyone out, but there’s a chance …
Helena Bonham Carter: ‘Divorce is cruel. But some parts are to be recommended' Ding-dong, it’s the doorbell. And look who’s standing on my rain-sodden doorstep, it’s Helena Bonham Carter. In her stompy, clumpy boots and dark flor …
Classical home listening: a good week for Bruckner fans • Bruckner struggled with his last completed symphony, the almighty Eighth, reworking initial efforts and leaving posterity to debate – fervently in s …
Billie Eilish: Where Do We Go?: the Livestream review – feel the fear… This is no gig for arachnophobes. Just as physical gigs used to warn people about strobe lights, Billie Eilish’s debut live stream might have included …
One to watch: GeeJay Summary: GeeJay have a humble origin story. Vocalist Gina Jane and producer, pianist and saxophonist Jacob Lobo formed the band while working together as baris …
Sean Connery, James Bond actor, dies aged 90 Sean Connery, the Scottish actor best known for his portrayal of James Bond, has died aged 90. His son, Jason, said he had died peacefully in his slee …
Wolfwalkers review – an exquisite Irish animation masterpiece Ireland’s Cartoon Saloon might not have the name recognition of Pixar or Ghibli. But make no mistake, this is a world-class animation studio. Wolfwalk …
Judith and Dave O'Higgins: His ’n’ Hers review – duelling saxes Summary: How do they do it, those rare individuals who combine playing music at the highest level with another, totally different and demanding occupation? In …
Sir Sean Connery obituary Summary: It would have been easy for Sean Connery, who has died aged 90, to bask in the fame and riches his most celebrated role brought him and never do film …
'He defined an era and a style': film world mourns Sean Connery Sean Connery, one of Britain’s greatest screen stars, has died at the age of 90. The Scottish actor, forever linked with the role of James Bond and re …
Relic review – heartbreaking horror about Alzheimer's Responses to cinema are, by nature, highly personal, with the very best movies tapping into wellsprings of emotion already deeply embedded in the view …
Hollywood braces for Depp ruling, but it's only the end of round one Summary: Whatever the outcome of Monday’s verdict in his blockbuster libel case, the world has not heard the last of Johnny Depp’s tempestuous relationship wit …
Mogul Mowgli review – fierce, unrelenting film-making Summary: Riz Ahmed delivers a blistering performance as Zed (an anglicised stage name abbreviated from Zaheer), a British-Pakistani rapper poised to conquer th …
Sam Smith: Love Goes review – longing to let loose Summary: Same as it ever was, heartbreak is bread and butter for the modern multimillion-selling pop star. Where Sam Smith’s last album plumbed the depths of a …
Ornella Volta obituary Ornella Volta, who has died aged 93, was the founder and creator of the Fondation Erik Satie and the Erik Satie Archive, a wonderful collection assemb …
Justin Connolly obituary Summary: My former composition teacher and friend, Justin Connolly, who has died aged 87, was a leading light of modernist music in Britain in the 1960s and 70 …
Positively shocking: Trump's boasts of help from Sean Connery fall apart Summary: It was less licence to kill and more dramatic licence. Donald Trump’s claim that the late Sean Connery assisted him in getting planning applications p …
Wesley Snipes on art, excellence and life after prison: 'I hope I came out a better person' Wesley Snipes seemed to have everything in the 90s and early 00s. He was a film star, gifted, gorgeous, chiselled from top to bottom. Box office gold. …
London high court to deliver ruling on Johnny Depp libel case The high court in London is to hand down its ruling on the libel case between Johnny Depp and the Sun newspaper at 10am on Monday, four months on from …
Home alone: how Almodóvar’s new film finds innovation in lockdown Summary: It is based on a Jean Cocteau play from 1930, but Pedro Almodóvar’s The Human Voice could well be the movie that best captures our bizarre modern time …
Johnny Depp loses libel case against Sun over claims he beat ex-wife Amber Heard The Hollywood actor Johnny Depp has lost his high-stakes libel action in the London courts against the Sun after the newspaper described him as a “wif …
Sean Connery had dementia, his wife reveals Sean Connery had dementia in his final months, his wife, Micheline Roquebrune, has revealed. Speaking to the Mail on Sunday, Roquebrune said: “He had …
Cocaine binges and $30,000 wine bills: Johnny Depp's lifestyle laid bare Private islands in the Bahamas, multiple penthouses, gargantuan monthly wine bills, blackout-inducing cocaine binges, drug rehab, trashed location hom …
Silver Sun's James Broad brought a dazzling new side to Britpop It’s a cruel quirk of artistry that praise is often at its most fervent when the artist is no longer around to hear it. When news broke of Silver Sun …
Pixies: how we made Where Is My Mind? Summary: Black Francis, songwriter The song is about a high-school trip to the Bahamas. I was swimming in clear water and there was a small fish – about four i …
How Amber Heard stood alone against a Hollywood superstar Though flanked by an all-female support team each day of her former husband’s libel trial against the Sun, in many ways Amber Heard had stood starkly …
The Sun's risky strategy vindicated in Johnny Depp libel case Johnny Depp’s high-profile and ultimately disastrous libel case against the Sun is a rarity in an era where financially struggling news outlets are le …
'Will make you jump out of your skin': readers on the best underseen horror films As Above So Below Starts out as a Tomb Raider-style adventure and then brings some claustrophobic creepiness. A great antidote to the current Hollywoo …
Johnny Depp trial: how the judge ruled on 14 alleged assaults The judge in the Johnny Depp libel action concluded that “the great majority of alleged assaults” on Amber Heard by the Pirates of the Caribbean star …
Johnny Depp’s defeat in libel case hailed by domestic violence charities Johnny Depp’s defeat in the London libel courts has been hailed by domestic violence charities as a victory that should encourage other victims to com …
Cary Grant never proposed to me on set, says Sophia Loren Summary: It was one of the greatest cinematic love stories of the 20th century, but Sophia Loren has now revealed that Cary Grant never proposed to her on set. …
Tsai Chin: 'What was it like being in bed with Sean Connery? Fine' ‘I have lived on my own since 1963,” says Tsai Chin down the phone from her home in Los Angeles. “It doesn’t mean I haven’t had a sex life.” But it do …
The fall of Johnny Depp: how the world's most beautiful movie star turned very ugly Johnny Depp is “a wife-beater”. This is the verdict of the UK courts. Just writing that sentence feels genuinely shocking, and yet, by now perhaps, it …
My streaming gem: why you should watch Short Term 12 When things haven’t been going your way, when you’ve been trying so hard to hold it together, sometimes you just need to let go. A raw drama about a c …
Lady Gaga attacks Trump's 'grab' remarks at Joe Biden rally Lady Gaga gave an impassioned message of support for Joe Biden as America heads to the polls, making reference to Donald Trump’s history of crude sexu …
Grammy awards rename world music category to avoid 'connotations of colonialism' The Grammys are changing the name of their “best world music” album category to “best global music” album, to avoid “connotations of colonialism”. In …
Love, death and tennis: the forgotten Italian masterpiece about the horror of fascism ‘In life, in order to really understand the world, you must die at least once. So it’s better to die young, while there’s time to recover and live aga …
Love Child review – refugee documentary finds love and warmth amid the misery Summary: Here’s a documentary that gives off warmth like a radiator, generating huge amounts of empathy. I’m not sure I’ve seen another film that has so moving …
Heard lost public sympathy for standing up against Depp assaults, says QC Amber Heard’s stand against Johnny Depp’s assaults should not have deprived her of public sympathy for suffering the ordeal of domestic violence, a le …
'We were lucky people didn't throw tomatoes': Klaus Voormann on his Beatles and Plastic Ono days In September 1969, the bass player and artist Klaus Voormann, who had recently left Manfred Mann, received a phone call from John Lennon. There was no …
'Fill the room with love': the stress-busting jazz of Alabaster dePlume Uncertainty has been the only constant of this strange year. For Gus Fairbairn, AKA multi-instrumentalist Alabaster dePlume, the anxiety bred by that …
Recorder: The Marion Stokes Project review – the woman who kept the TV on for 30 years Here is the strange, but undoubtedly compelling and even heroic story of Marion Stokes, a historian and television producer from Philadelphia who from …
Handel: where to start with his music A German composer who brought Italian musical fashions to a London audience, George Frideric Handel (1685-1759) is the baroque era’s theatre composer …
Spore's the pity: how Fantastic Fungi flags up man's abuse of nature Watching the anemone stinkhorn sprout from the soil is a wondrous – and terrifying – thing. Emerging from a pod that looks like a truffle, the mushroo …
Looted review - car-stealing thriller paints picture of post-industrial decay Petty criminal Rob (Charley Palmer Rothwell) has a busier schedule than most gainfully employed people in this affecting debut feature from director R …
Luxor review - beautifully sparse character study amid Egypt's ancient glory Slow, delicate and sparse, Luxor is coming out on digital this week just as all the cinemas close down again. If you have a chance to see it, try to v …
A Place Among the Dead review - Drusilla from Buffy turns the camera on herself ‘You’re that girl from Buffy,” someone says to actor-writer-director Juliet Landau at one point in A Place Among the Dead. Landau makes that thumbnail …
Brazen Hussies review – reclaiming the history of Australia's women's liberation movement Summary: Three years ago I went searching for historic sites of the Sydney women’s liberation movement. A Glebe terrace that was briefly the movement’s unoffic …
Nuclear review – escape to the post-apocalyptic country A strange, semi-hallucinatory film from debut feature director Catherine Linstrum that teeters on the edge of incoherence, and then sometimes teeters …
About Endlessness review – mesmerising odyssey to the heart of existence Maybe at the age of 78 he feels he’s approaching the end … of his career, of his life, of everything. Despite or because of it, Swedish auteur Roy And …
Little Mix: Confetti review – still stuck inside the pop factory In 2018, a few days before the release of Little Mix’s last album, the quartet announced their split from Simon Cowell’s Syco company, which had sheph …
Lucky Grandma review – gambling granny goes on fun knockabout caper Sentimentalising, patronising and generally disrespecting our elders is by now enough of a movie trope that any title including the words “grandma” or …
Facing the fear: cinema finally confronts the reality of dementia I’ve yet to see a film that sufficiently gets to the heart of what it means to watch a loved one lose their mind to dementia. Those that have garnered …
Ken Hensley, songwriter with 70s rock band Uriah Heep, dies aged 75 Ken Hensley, the songwriter and multi-instrumentalist best known for his work with 70s rock band Uriah Heep, has died aged 75. His press representativ …
Neil Young – every album ranked! 45. Landing on Water (1986) If other 1970s greats, including Don Henley, were having 80s hits with modern, synth-heavy records then why shouldn’t Neil …
Vanitas: Lieder by Schubert, Beethoven and Rihm review – songs in the key of life The Austrian baritone Georg Nigl’s disc with pianist Olga Pashchenko mostly replicates a recital the pair gave at the Berlin festival in September las …
Lost the magic? Warner Bros struggles with Depp fallout and Witches criticism There are many elements of Roald Dahl’s bibliography that sit poorly if one views them through a progressive prism: George’s Marvellous Medicine is ba …
Cinemas battle to keep filmgoing flame alive as UK lockdown bites Summary: Cinemas across England shut down today as the new national restrictions introduced by Boris Johnson take effect. Cinemas are already closed in Wales, …
Let Him Go review – Costner and Lane take on Manville in fun, fiery thriller Summary: There’s a vital, game-changing scene in robust neo-western thriller Let Him Go that occurs as the last act beckons, one that finally reveals the true …
Sophia Loren: 'The body changes. The mind does not' The CGI lioness that materialises at intervals in the Netflix drama The Life Ahead is a sad and sorry-looking thing. It has a glossy gold coat and a t …
From Supalonely to stadiums: meet Benee, a 'normal idiot from New Zealand' Twelve thousand fans packed into a venue on a Saturday night, phones aloft, no masks in sight: it looks like a scene from another era, not October 202 …
From Weezer to Missy Elliott: 10 of the best difficult second albums Second Coming (1994) The Stone Roses Released five years after the Madchester pioneers’ era-defining debut, Second Coming has become synonymous with d …
Dutchavelli: Dutch from the 5th review – drill trailblazer gets deep 2020 is going Dutch. The east London drill rapper – and brother of Stefflon Don – assisted Tion Wayne and Stormzy to make I Dunno a contender for UK r …
Steven Berkoff’s teenage obsessions: ‘I became very adept at jive' Italian neorealism I loved Italian neorealist films as a teenager because they always featured somebody struggling to find themselves in a city. Mirac …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Reyna, Ariana Grande, Finneas Reyna 7’11 A woozy, groovy little number from the Milwaukee sister duo – kind of Charli XCX meets Saint Etienne – with a Spanish chorus that will make …
Erin Wall obituary The Canadian-American soprano Erin Wall, who has died aged 44 of complications resulting from metastatic breast cancer, was highly regarded for her he …
Singer, activist, sex machine, addict: the troubled brilliance of Billie Holiday There’s an electrifying moment in Billie, a new documentary about Billie Holiday, when Jonathan “Jo” Jones, a tempestuous, influential African America …
Cottage industry: the enduring power of the ‘cabin in the woods’ album For some, the “cabin in the woods” album aesthetic reached critical mass in 2011, with a headline in the Onion: “Man Just Going To Grab Guitar And Old …
Fretwork review – John Paul Jones opens LIFEM with idiosyncratic and effective new work The annual Tudor Pull is one of the quirky traditions that London keeps yielding up if you look for them. Every year – except 2020, of course – the Qu …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 6-13 November BBC Symphony Orchestra/Oramo The BBCSO’s first live concert of the autumn at the Barbican includes the world premiere of a chamber-orchestra arrangeme …
Johnny Depp says he has been asked to resign from Fantastic Beasts franchise Summary: Johnny Depp is set to exit the Fantastic Beasts franchise after being asked to resign by Warner Bros. The actor announced the decision in a statement …
Mank review – David Fincher swooningly revisits myth of Citizen Kane David Fincher has dreamed the life of Hollywood screenwriter Herman J Mankiewicz; the result looks gorgeous, and sounds gorgeous. It’s a swooning mono …
Cliff Richard becomes first artist to reach UK Top 5 across eight decades Cliff Richard has become the first artist to reach the Top 5 of the UK album chart across eight consecutive decades. His new album Music … The Air Tha …
Lime Cordiale, Le Pie, The Whitlams and more: Australia's best new music for November The Whitlams – Ballad of Bertie Kidd For fans of: Tim Freedman, Randy Newman, Don Walker The Whitlams’ first single in 14 years finds Tim Freedman in …
Streaming: films about the refugee crisis The European refugee crisis has inspired so many films in recent years that the subject practically qualifies as a genre in itself, encompassing as br …
Classical home listening: John Tavener: No Longer Mourn for Me; Josquin Masses and more • At once tough and inspiring, the cellist Steven Isserlis’s tribute to John Tavener, No Longer Mourn for Me (Hyperion), combines various musical forc …
Opera Triple Bill: Wolf-Ferrari, Mascagni, Donizetti review – sex, violence and serious talent Three one-act operas, three women: one who beats up her docile husband; one a prostitute who dreams of unsullied love; one whose secret, how bad can i …
Recorder: The Marion Stokes Project review – the ultimate news junkie Between 1977 and 2012, when she died aged 83, Marion Stokes recorded more than 70,000 VHS and Betamax tapes’ worth of television footage. A wealthy Af …
Tunng: Tunng Presents… Dead Club review – a thoughtful meditation on life and loss A concept album about death and grief during a pandemic? Now there’s bravery. Fortunately, Tunng bring a characteristically light touch to these tende …
About Endlessness review – curious scenes from a singular Swede This typically humanist compendium of human frailty from the creator of the acclaimed “Living Trilogy” has been described by some as Roy Andersson’s f …
Luxor review – Andrea Riseborough digs deep in PTSD drama on the Nile Andrea Riseborough floats around the Egyptian city of Luxor in this contemplative drama from British writer-director Zeina Durra about a doctor with P …
Marielle Heller: 'I don't think we have to be jerks to make good art' It’s 2pm on polling day in Connecticut and Marielle Heller is hunkering down to await the result of the US election with her family, after venturing o …
Ariana Grande: Positions review – saucy but safe Whether she’s singing about her exes or world-shaking tragedy, or both, Ariana Grande has always been an open-book superstar. But few expected the bal …
Ken Hensley obituary As a teenager Ken Hensley, who has died aged 75, was determined to become a rock star. “Everything I did from the age of 16 onwards was focused entire …
Gabriel Byrne: 'There’s a shame about men speaking out. A sense that if you were abused, it was your fault' Forget the pollsters. If you wanted to know the outcome of last week’s US election, you just had to ask Gabriel Byrne. I did, a month ago. I wish I ha …
Bones Hillman, Midnight Oil's 'bassist with the beautiful voice', dies aged 62 Midnight Oil’s bassist and backing vocalist Bones Hillman has died at the age of 62. The New Zealand-born Hillman died at his home in Milwaukee on Sat …
Bones Hillman's bass was exemplary but his vocals were intrinsic to Midnight Oil's sound The first time I saw Wayne Stevens – better known by his stage name Bones Hillman – was at the Brisbane Entertainment Centre on 26 September 1987, mak …
Pete Baillie obituary My friend Pete Baillie, who has died aged 73 , was a music lover who set up a mid-1980s fanzine called Capital M that covered the London pub rock scen …
'It's the screams of the damned!' The eerie AI world of deepfake music ‘It’s Christmas time! It’s hot tub time!” sings Frank Sinatra. At least, it sounds like him. With an easy swing, cheery bonhomie, and understated bras …
BBCSO/Oramo review – luminous and mesmerising Summary: The 90th birthday of the BBC Symphony Orchestra last month inevitably went the way of many other celebrations this year. BBCSO’s establishment in 1930 …
Stanley Kubrick and Kirk Douglas wanted Doctor Zhivago movie rights It is one of the greatest British films of all time, directed in 1965 by David Lean with an A-list cast that included Julie Christie, Omar Sharif and …
The show the military couldn't stop: Luca Guadagnino on We Are Who We Are Lockdown was a nightmare for Luca Guadagnino. His dad died, his partner left and his myriad film projects had to be put in mothballs. As soon as restr …
Rapper Junglepussy: ‘I don’t like the narrative that women have to be superheroes’ Summary: Junglepussy has a picture of the original nasty gal, Betty Davis, on her fridge in her Brooklyn apartment. “A lot of people felt the same way about he …
Hillbilly Elegy review – Glenn Close's grouchy gran saves the day Ron Howard’s new movie, based on the bestselling memoir by JD Vance, is a solemn true story of self-betterment from tough beginnings, like the “person …
Rogue review – it's Megan Fox v stalking lion in an energetic action thriller Summary: If hit Netflix documentary Tiger King had you championing the big cat cause, here’s the animal rights-respecting action-thriller you should watch next …
Eastern review – Polish 'western' of male humiliation and revenge Summary: Set aside the Ennio Morricone-homaging soundtrack and Eastern isn’t as much “western” as it is Greek. The detached wide shots framing bizarrely inexpr …
Joining the world's first gay rugby team changed my life. So I made a film about it When I read Dan Palmer’s brave and honest coming out column in the Sydney Morning Herald last week, suddenly I was jolted back to a dark place seven y …
Joan Armatrading: 'I want to make a heavy metal album – with lots of guitar shredding' ‘It’s very nice to be honoured,” says Joan Armatrading, down the phone from her home in Surrey. The 69-year-old is talking about receiving this year’s …
'She made music jump into 3D': Wendy Carlos, the reclusive synth genius Summary: This summer, an 80-year-old synthesiser pioneer suddenly appeared online. She had been silent for 11 years, but now something had appeared that she ju …
Mads Mikkelsen lined up to replace Johnny Depp in Fantastic Beasts 3 Hannibal star Mads Mikkelsen is set to replace Johnny Depp as Gellert Grindelwald in Fantastic Beasts 3, it has been reported. According to Deadline, …
Nova Lituania review –  droll study of a Baltic state's identity crisis Summary: Although aggressively retro both in terms of its subject – the annexation of Lithuania during the second world war – and visually, given that it’s sho …
MPs to hold inquiry into ensuring post-pandemic survival of music festivals MPs are to examine how UK music festivals can survive in 2021 after the coronavirus pandemic wiped out a majority of festivals this year, resulting in …
Dvořák: where to start with his music Antonín Dvořák (1841-1904) was a passionate Czech whose music transcended national boundaries and, indeed, crossed the world. A contemporary of Brahms …
Finding Steve McQueen review – heist comedy can't locate its charisma A little-remembered bank job from the Nixon era is the true-crime inspiration for this lightweight sub-Goodfellas caper, which runs low on gas and gag …
To the Ends of the Earth review – dreamlike vision of clashing cultures Kiyoshi Kurosawa is the Japanese film-maker known for his horror movies in the 90s, and the excellent drama Tokyo Sonata from 2009 about a salaryman w …
Wild Mountain Thyme trailer blamed for Irish accent emergency A trailer is all that Ireland has seen of Hollywood’s latest romantic comedy, but that has been enough to declare an Irish accent emergency. Wild Moun …
Blood Harvest review – sects and gore aplenty in pagan folk horror Canadian writer-director Thomas Robert Lee’s follow up to his little-known debut Empyrean, Blood Harvest simmers with unease and lingers in the mind – …
John Fraser obituary The actor John Fraser, who has died aged 89, received his first review while still a teenager, playing a page to Herodias in Oscar Wilde’s Salome. Des …
Freaky review – wildly entertaining body swap comedy horror There’s a stinging sense of cruelty to just how much fun one can squeeze from the high-concept comedy horror Freaky, a film that most of us won’t get …
‘A massive game-changer’: how Channel U brought grime to satellite TV If you haven’t heard of Channel U – the defunct UK rap and grime music channel that launched in 2003 in a blaze of anarchic, DIY spirit – it may sound …
Fireball: Visitors from Darker Worlds review – Werner Herzog dodges meteorites In 2007, Werner Herzog made a movie about Antarctica called Encounters at the End of the World, where he met the Cambridge University geographer and s …
Billie review – a truer, historical spin on the great  Billie Holiday There’s a structural oddity in this very fascinating if slightly flawed documentary about the life and times of the great singer Billie Holiday, who d …
Pa Salieu: Send Them to Coventry review – on the frontline with the UK's freshest new rapper Summary: This year may well have been the toughest in history for a new artist to break through to mainstream success. It’s not merely the lack of gigs, festiv …
Katharine Hepburn’s 20 best films – ranked! 20. State of the Union (1948) Katharine Hepburn is exactly the kind of star who should be in a Frank Capra picture. This presidential election drama w …
Rapper Octavian denies allegations of verbal, physical and emotional abuse French-British rapper Octavian (AKA Octavian Oliver Godji) has denied allegations of verbal, physical and emotional abuse made by a former partner. In …
Jingle Jangle: A Christmas Journey review – a sugar rush of steampunk joy Christmas is coming. And if anyone is not convinced it’s the most wonderful time of the year, here’s an excessively Christmassy Victorian-set musical …
Neil Diamond's teenage obsessions: 'The Brooklyn Dodgers betrayed me and broke my heart' Brooklyn Dodgers I was born and raised in Brooklyn, and for me the most important aspect of growing up there was the Dodgers baseball team. Everybody …
A Bag of Bagatelles: Piano Works by Birtwistle and Beethoven review – authority and clarity For the first 40 years of his composing career, Harrison Birtwistle wrote no major works for solo piano. There were a few miniatures, beginning with P …
'It's all such new territory': what it's like growing up trans in middle America Transhood, a new documentary following four transgender youths in the midwest, hovers in the tension between universal and specific: the navigation of …
Archie Roach’s Took the Children Away: how one heartbreaking song galvanised a nation Summary: It wasn’t hard to find people who wanted to talk about Archie Roach: everyone approached by the Guardian said yes, and all of them spoke from the hear …
Secret to succession: does it matter if a film franchise changes its star? At the climax of Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, Gellert Grindelwald, the ultimate threat to peace in the Wizarding World, is revealed. Havin …
Techno DJ Derrick May accused of sexual assault by four women Summary: Techno DJ and producer Derrick May has been accused of sexual assault by four women, which he denies. In testimonies to DJ Mag, the women, speaking un …
Chhalaang review – PE teachers do battle in a romcom Rocky The housebound Diwali celebrations of 2020 kick off with this appreciably daft comedy on an enduring theme of Indian cinema: the goon’s redemption. In …
The Weeknd to headline Super Bowl 2021 half-time show The Weeknd has been announced as the headline performer at next year’s Super Bowl. The Grammy award-winning Canadian singer, whose hits include Starbo …
Raging Bull at 40: Scorsese's brutal boxing saga still bruises There is a tendency among audiences – including, sometimes, even the best of critics – to judge movies by how much we warm to their characters. An “un …
Lucia Cadotsch: Speak Low II review – jazz standards dissolved and recast Lucia Cadotsch’s 2016 debut Speak Low unveiled the young Swiss musician’s unusual proposition, singing the classics with spellbindingly impassive puri …
Kylie, Cher, Robbie Williams and more team up for Children in Need single Summary: Kylie Minogue, Cher, Robbie Williams and more have teamed up for a charity single to benefit Children in Need. The supergroup was assembled by Radio 2 …
Lennox: The Untold Story review – a ringside seat for the rise of a champ If there’s one world heavyweight champion whose legend needs a little burnishing, it’s Lennox Lewis, and this documentary profile does a decent nuts-a …
New Order frontman Bernard Sumner recovering from coronavirus Summary: New Order frontman Bernard Sumner has said he is recovering from coronavirus. Speaking to Minnesota radio station The Current, he said he caught it th …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 13-20 November Mozart’s Requiem The performance that should have marked English National Opera’s return to the Coliseum is now a TV event. Mark Wigglesworth conducts …
Streaming: the best jazz films Summary: The first thing anyone ever heard in the movies was jazz – in cinema’s first sound film, The Jazz Singer, of course, a creaky 1927 backstage drama tha …
Classical home listening: two Labyrinths, one Gran Partita and a Requiem Labyrinth David Greilsammer (Naïve) Labyrinth Khatia Buniatishvili (Sony) Mark Simpson: Geysir; Mozart: ‘Gran Partita’, K361 (Orchid Classics) • Two p …
Lawrence Power and Ryan Wigglesworth review – effortless brilliance From the emotional muscularity of Brahms to the spiky mystery of Britten, to the glittering, pinpoint invention of a new work by Ryan Wigglesworth, th …
One to watch: the Lathums In any other year, a band on the up playing a gig at a renowned local landmark would have guaranteed a sell-out crowd and a celebratory atmosphere. Bu …
Jingle Jangle: A Christmas Journey review – stridently festive toyshop musical There’s the kind of escapist entertainment that effortlessly wafts the audience into a fantastical realm; then there’s the kind that hogties the viewe …
Dave Brubeck: Lullabies – genial sleepytime jazz Summary: Dave Brubeck is famous for his 1961 megahit Take Five (composed by his saxophonist, Paul Desmond), and catchy numbers in odd time signatures such as B …
James Blunt: ‘My body has not been a temple. I’ve put it through painful experiences’ I was an army brat who lived on army patches – in Cyprus, Hong Kong, Germany and as far afield and exotic as Yorkshire. Every two years we’d move with …
The Life Ahead review – Sophia Loren's commanding comeback In 1962, Sophia Loren won an Academy Award for her starring role in Vittorio De Sica’s Two Women (La ciociara), the first actor to triumph at the Osca …
Doctor Who's sonic pioneers to turn internet into giant musical instrument The Radiophonic Workshop has always broken new sonic ground, from the Doctor Who theme to the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. Now they’re at it agai …
To the Ends of the Earth review – a subtle awakening in Uzbekistan Understated and slyly unexpected in its approach, this offbeat story follows Yoko (J-pop star turned actor Atsuko Maeda), the presenter of a Japanese …
Benee: Hey U X review – endearingly careworn Released at the end of last year, Supalonely – 20-year-old New Zealander Stella Bennett’s breakthrough hit – found a new life via TikTok in March, as …
My streaming gem: why you should watch And Breathe Normally Summary: What happens when one person’s day at work is another’s catastrophe? For the likes of border control officers who enforce the sharpest ends of governm …
Free willy: are film and TV finally growing up about male nudity? Summary: In terms of an attention-grabbing tagline, the Belgian movie Patrick had me at “Naturist campsite handyman loses his hammer”. Don’t expect anything sa …
Joker 'a betrayal' of mentally ill people, says David Fincher Mank director David Fincher has described Todd Phillips’ Oscar-winning Joker as “a betrayal” of mentally ill people. In an interview with the Daily Te …
English National Opera/Wigglesworth review – Mozart's Requiem is urgent and direct In the time of Covid, any concert is an achievement in itself. This performance of Mozart’s Requiem by English National Opera under Mark Wigglesworth …
How we made: Take My Breath Away, the Top Gun theme tune by Berlin Terri Nunn, singer Before I was in Berlin I auditioned for the part of Princes Leia in Star Wars. I was 15 but looked 12. Harrison Ford was over 30 bu …
Billie Eilish to headline Aria awards ceremony Billie Eilish will headline this year’s Aria awards, in a coup for organisers made possible by the new normal of live-streamed events. The singer-song …
Kylie Minogue's appeal has always been in her sparkling transcendence of the ordinary It would have taken a brave soothsayer to predict, back in the 1980s, that Kylie Minogue was on track to become Australia’s most enduring pop icon. Li …
Matt Dillon's still ready to rumble: 'I have never lived a sheltered life' In his time, Matt Dillon has been about as quintessentially American a screen presence as you can imagine. From his early blazing-youth roles in Franc …
Mike Campbell on life after Tom Petty: 'I think I found my own voice' Heartbreakers’ guitarist Mike Campbell vividly remembers the first time his star bandmate Tom Petty heard a recording of him singing. “‘That’s weird,’ …
Meet Chubby and the Gang, UK punk’s most vital new band “My parents were punks, back in the 70s,” says Charlie Manning Walker, otherwise known as Chubby Charles, the leader of UK punk’s most exciting new ba …
Pharrell Williams announces gender-neutral skincare line The musician and entrepreneur Pharrell Williams has announced the release of Humanrace, his long-awaited skincare line. Significantly, it is gender ne …
Taylor Swift criticises Scooter Braun after $300m masters sale Taylor Swift has criticised music industry mogul Scooter Braun over his sale of her master recordings to a US private equity firm, including the accus …
Cemetery review – elephant heads for the graveyard in hardcore art piece Summary: Carlos Casas’s Cemetery arrives on the arthouse streaming service Mubi, a slow sensory film with a magnetic pull of strangeness; it may test the endur …
Dolly Parton partly funded Moderna Covid vaccine research It’s truly the greatest gift of all: a $1m donation by Dolly Parton to coronavirus vaccine research supported the development of the Moderna vaccine, …
Ext.Night review – After Hours-ish, Cairo-set yarn hampered by misogyny Independent Egyptian director Ahmad Abdalla, whose previous dramatic features (including Rags & Tatters, Heliopolis and Microphone) found favour on th …
Dennis Wickens obituary My father, Dennis Wickens, who has died aged 94, was a composer who reached his widest audience after his 80th birthday. It was not until he was singi …
Little Mix's Jesy Nelson taking time off for 'private medical reasons' Summary: British band Little Mix have announced that Jesy Nelson is taking “extended time off” from the band “for private medical reasons”. The group have aske …
Shakin' Stevens: 'I was over the moon playing Elvis. The first time I got a regular wage' Something momentous happened in January 1980, something that profoundly affected the British charts for the most of the following decade: Shakin’ Stev …
Diplo denies claim that he threatened to distribute revenge porn A Los Angeles woman has filed a restraining order against Diplo, AKA Thomas Wesley Pentz, seeking to prevent the producer from “distributing revenge p …
Lil Wayne faces up to 10 years in jail on weapons possession charges The rapper Lil Wayne (AKA Dwayne Michael Carter Jr) has been charged with weapons possession and faces up to 10 years in prison if convicted. Carter’s …
Richard Strauss: where to start with his music Richard Strauss (1864-1949) dominated classical music at the turn of the 20th century with a series of works that pushed post-Romanticism to extremes …
Bruce Swedien, studio engineer for Michael Jackson, dies aged 86 Summary: Bruce Swedien, the studio engineer who helped define Michael Jackson’s 1980s sound, has died aged 86. His daughter Roberta said he had died in his sle …
Skyfire review – fiery volcanic action thriller fails to generate much heat ‘This might be the safest place on Earth!” Uh oh. A flamboyant entrepreneur is reassuring a group of tourists in a glass elevator at his volcano theme …
Death of Me review – Thai-holiday thriller can't supply the scares Here is a promising idea for a scary movie that proves to be unscary and uninteresting in the most baffling, frustrating way. It starts out with a wei …
Patrick review – shocking grief and startling nudity ‘Nudity seldom looks good, even on the young” was a maxim of the late Clive James that came into my mind while watching this enjoyable if self-conscio …
All I want for Christmas is normality: festive hits chart earlier than ever Summary: This year’s Christmas is set to look rather different, with smaller gatherings, shuttered high streets and lower-stakes seasonal ads. New data, howeve …
Mank: a death wish of a movie that could never live up to the legend of Orson Welles We are waiting in an age that believes in symptoms of malaise. We wonder if we might be slipping. The picture business feels dead on its feet. So it’s …
Collective review – shocking exposé of needless deaths in Romania Summary: For years, actually for decades, Romanian directors have been warning us about top-to-bottom official corruption in their homeland – an insidious mala …
Radio 1 to air censored version of Pogues' Fairytale of New York Summary: BBC Radio 1 is to air a censored version of the Pogues’ Fairytale of New York that removes the words “faggot” and “slut” from Kirsty MacColl’s verse. …
Save Yourselves! review – end-of-days comedy balances satire, sincerity and silliness This end-of-the-world comedy premiered at Sundance in January 2020 – in the Before Time – and, had the coronavirus pandemic not struck, directors Alex …
Happiest Season review – queer Christmas comedy is a festive treat The displacement of theatrical releases during the pandemic, forced into an often confusing digital netherworld, has meant that we have little to no i …
'My mother was like a steel fist in a velvet glove': the real Audrey Hepburn Summary: “Very alert, very smart, very talented, very ambitious.” That was the director William Wyler’s verdict after watching a screen test for Roman Holiday …
Asia review – delicate tale of a mother and daughter in crisis Summary: This is a candid, sober, well-acted debut by the first-time director Ruthy Pribar which won her the Nora Ephron award at this year’s Tribeca film fest …
Shabaka Hutchings/Britten Sinfonia/Paterson review - tangible exhilaration If Aaron Copland enjoyed writing his Clarinet Concerto for Benny Goodman, he would have loved the chance to write for Shabaka Hutchings. Mainly on sax …
Slide away: Swindon waterpark that gave Oasis their name to close Oasis, the Swindon leisure centre that gave one of the UK’s biggest bands its name, is to close down. Operators of the facility, which features a wate …
Wonder Woman 1984 sticks to Christmas cinema release – but will also be on digital The decision by Warner Bros to release Christopher Nolan’s Tenet in cinemas last August despite depleted venues and public confidence was hailed as a …
Kebabs by Nicole Kidman? What Ryan Reynolds' takeover of Wrexham might lead to As the third oldest professional football team in the world, Wrexham AFC drags the weight of history behind it. There were the early days, where the t …
Cabaret Voltaire: Shadow of Fear review – a fittingly dystopian fantasy from Sheffield's industrial pioneers Between 1974 and 1994, Cabaret Voltaire made a career out of being slightly ahead of the curve. They may well have been the world’s first industrial b …
Angelina Jolie to direct biopic of photographer Don McCullin starring Tom Hardy Angelina Jolie is to direct a biopic of photojournalist Don McCullin, starring Tom Hardy. The film, which is being adapted by ’71 screenwriter Gregory …
Heaven's Gate at 40: how we learned to love a notorious flop For 40 years, Heaven’s Gate has been synonymous with “expensive flop”. And not just any expensive flop, but the type of boondoggle associated with the …
Should the BBC have censored Fairytale of New York? The Radio 1 listener: Alex Hood A culture war around the Pogues’ song Fairytale of New York feels like a new Christmas tradition, like a Lindt chocola …
Why Mangrove is guilty of being a better courtroom drama than Sorkin's Chicago 7 It’s no coincidence that two courtroom dramas such as Steve McQueen’s Mangrove and Aaron Sorkin’s The Trial of the Chicago 7 should have come out arou …
Finding Jack Charlton review – touching portrait of a footballing hero The story of Jack Charlton’s amazing ascent and virtual canonisation as the manager of the Irish Republic’s national football team in the 80s and 90s …
$5 gigs, not $10m deals: the story of US punk label Dischord Records “Do you know what I call an un-played record?” asks Ian MacKaye. “A piece of fucking trash. It’s paper and plastic. So if I make something, I want to …
Contento: Lo Bueno Está Aquí review – 'salsapunks' invent a joyful hybrid In the 1960s, salsa’s sprightly piano melodies, clave rhythms and syncopated percussion took off in New York, and its deeply kinetic combination becam …
Five of the best documentaries, as chosen by Werner Herzog I don’t watch films,” says Werner Herzog. “People always believe that a film-maker would have seen hundreds or thousands of films – if you have a man …
Céline Dion loses $13m dispute with concert agent Summary: Céline Dion has lost a $13m dispute with her former concert agent, who she accused of being “wildly” overpaid for a $489m (£370m) negotiation he made …
Sylvester McCoy's teenage obsessions: 'I was the twist king of Dunoon' Doing the twist I come from a place called Dunoon, a small seaside town on the Firth of Clyde, just inside the Highlands. It’s like that town Dylan Th …
Richard Burton exhibition looks beyond the hell-raiser headlines Summary: He is as famous for his turbulent personal life as his acting skills: a hard-living, heavy-drinking, headline-grabbing Hollywood icon. But a much more …
Natalia Lafourcade and Residente win big at 2020 Latin Grammy awards Summary: Spanish pop star Alejandro Sanz, Mexican folk-pop singer Natalia Lafourcade and Puerto Rican rapper Residente were the biggest winners at the 2020 Lat …
Jamie Lynn Spears: 'Britney created so much power for herself – I wanted that too' Jamie Lynn Spears was sitting in a car, surrounded by screaming fans, when it finally hit her. Of course, she knew her sister Britney was successful – …
Rodney P admits assaulting two women British hip-hop artist Rodney P has admitted assaulting an ex-girlfriend who told the BBC that she feared for her life after he hit her in the face an …
A black Alice in Wonderland? That's a real fairytale ending Summary: There’s a long history of rightwing antipathy towards progressive racebending – if we can even call it that – in the movies. From Idris Elba as Heimda …
Megan Thee Stallion: Good News review – galloping into greatness On YouTube, you can still see one of Megan Thee Stallion’s early appearances at a 2016 rap cypher in Houston. It’s a very telling performance. Twenty- …
Yungblud: 'Me and Lewis Capaldi used to get into all sorts of trouble' Summary: Self-professed punk and anointed voice of a generation Yungblud has done himself a mischief. The day before our interview, while sporting a pair of ti …
The week in classical: L'enfant et les sortilèges; Love Lies and Justice – review “The phantasmagoria is constant,” Ravel said – needlessly – of his magic-filled opera L’enfant et les sortilèges (The Child and the Spells). This shor …
Neil Young: Archives Vol II: 1972-1976 review – guitar duels, live jams and onstage banter If you’re fresh to the news that the second instalment in Neil Young’s epochal archive striptease is finally upon us, it’s already too late. The 3,000 …
The Kid Detective review – one of the darkest comedies of the year Rarely has a film been so underserved by its title. The Kid Detective: it conjures images of a perky, Disneyesque B-movie from the late 70s. In fact, …
Katy Carr: Providence review – Anglo-Polish ballads of freedom Nottingham-born singer Katy Carr has followed a singular grail over recent years, exploring her Polish heritage on 2012’s Paszport and 2015’s Polonia, …
Patrick review – wry, existential nudist comedy For most British filmgoers, mentions of naturism will automatically summon up visions of Sid James and Bernard Bresslaw hyperventilating over a docume …
Luke Abbott: Translate review – lush and cavernous Sinister and grandiose, hectic and bucolic, Norfolk producer Luke Abbott’s third album accretes big sense impressions from some wildly disparate sourc …
Slowthai: 'I know who I am, I know what I stand for' Dressed – half-dressed – in a yellow tracksuit top and black shorts, Slowthai looks like a man who’s just got up, because he has (it’s 2.45pm). The No …
Asia review – mesmerising mother-daughter drama A mother and a teenage daughter, not quite estranged but locked into diverging paths, are forced to find common ground when the daughter’s degenerativ …
Remembering Selena: the legacy of a murdered star Luis Miguel Ramírez can still remember where he was when he heard that Selena Quintanilla, the biggest star on the Tejano music scene, had been shot d …
Ariodante review – Paula Murrihy dazzles in Handel's dark drama Handel wrote Ariodante in 1735 for the Covent Garden theatre that stood on the site of what is now the Royal Opera House, so the Royal Opera’s decisio …
Tayla Parx: Coping Mechanisms review – a treat of a breakup album Summary: Grammy-nominated for her work with Ariana Grande, Texan Tayla Parx is best known for her songwriting for other people. Increasingly, though, she looks …
Could Steve McQueen start a lovers rock revival with Small Axe? One of the most memorable moments in Steve McQueen’s Lovers Rock – the latest film in his five-part anthology series Small Axe – comes when a room ful …
White House downer: why Hollywood should steer clear of a Trump biopic Finally, the US presidential race is over. Which unfortunately signals the start of another race: who will be the first to get a Trump biopic out of t …
Taylor Swift named artist of the year at American Music Awards Taylor Swift has extended her lead as the most awarded star in American Music Awards history, with three wins on a night that also rewarded Justin Bie …
London's Latin pop explosion: 'The body decodes the music's meaning' Summary: In the UK, Spanish-language pop generally equates to exoticised summer smashes like Livin’ La Vida Loca and Mambo No 5. Hits such as Despacito and Mi …
The Seven Deadly Sins review – Hollywood highs and Depression lows with uncanny resonances It’s not simply the cardinal sins of Roman Catholic theology that are invoked in Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht’s sung ballet, their last collaboration …
From Trump's failures to frustration in Wuhan: the rise of Covid documentaries As early as April this year, Vulture reported that at least 20 coronavirus-related documentary projects were shooting or seeking funding. Seven months …
The saga of Tekashi 6ix9ine: inside the story of a 'supervillain' rapper Summary: With his rainbow-colored tresses and prominent facial tattoos, it’s hard not to stare at SoundCloud rapper and viral sensation Tekashi 6ix9ine. The 24 …
Gus Van Sant: 'We are living in a wilder time than anything we could imagine' At home in California over lockdown Gus Van Sant, king of the Hollywood underground, was, like the rest of us, binge-watching Netflix. “Ozark, that wa …
Nines tops nominations for first Mobo awards since 2017 The Mobo awards, which celebrate music of Black origin, have announced the nominees for their first ceremony since 2017, championing a banner year for …
Overseas review – maids in training make haunting viewing As a study of loneliness and suppressed fear, this stylised documentary from the Korean-born director Sung-a Yoon could hardly be improved on. It is a …
Director apologizes for unmuted critique of actor's apartment during audition A director who forgot to mute his microphone during a Zoom audition as he criticised an actor’s apartment has apologised and claimed he was just sympa …
Aria awards 2020: Billie Eilish, Sia and Sam Smith gear up for Australian music's biggest night This far into the global pandemic we’re pretty used to televised award ceremonies looking a little different. But for the Australian music industry’s …
Beyoncé tops 2021 Grammy nominations in strong field for women Beyoncé has topped the nominees for the 2021 Grammy awards, heading up a year that celebrated female artistry right across pop genres – but there were …
BTS become first K-pop act to receive a Grammy nomination The South Korean megastars BTS have notched up yet another achievement by becoming the first K-pop act to receive a Grammy nomination. The boy band’s …
From Beyoncé to the Oscars: Mary Twala, Africa's queen of cinema Mary Twala died just a few weeks before Beyoncé’s Black Is King came out. In the film, the 80-year-old embodied the story’s shaman figure, the last pa …
'Frank didn't adhere to any movements': behind the Zappa documentary In the decades since the death of Frank Zappa, scores of film-makers had approached his wife and business partner Gail about making a documentary abou …
The Weeknd alleges Grammys corruption after nominations snub Summary: Canadian pop star the Weeknd has said the Grammys “remain corrupt” after receiving no nominations in the latest awards list for his 2020 album After H …
Exclusive: watch two short films inspired by a locked-down City of London Summary: The City of London, once the vibrant and bustling centre with hundreds of thousands of workers filling the streets of the Square Mile each day, has be …
Locked In: Breaking the Silence review – life-affirming story of a devastating illness A neurological horror story lies at the centre of Xavier Alford’s chilling, stoic and finally revitalising documentary, part of the BBC Storyville str …
From Vivaldi to Vaughan Williams: more musical voices who have changed our world The aim of the Know the score series was straightforward. To assist the reader who is curious about classical music, and to help them find some entry …
Aria awards 2020: Archie Roach and Sampa the Great electrify as Tame Impala win big Hip-hop artist Sampa the Great called out the lack of diversity of the Australian music industry in general – and of the Australian Recording Industry …
Visual Acoustics: The Modernism of Julius Shulman review – a lens on California dreaming This absorbing documentary from 2008 focuses on Julius Shulman (1910-2009), a photographer best known for his stylish, dynamic studies of mid-century …
Superintelligence review – Melissa McCarthy can't save unfunny AI comedy Melissa McCarthy, a respected two-time Oscar nominee and hysterically funny comic dynamo, has a problem, a longtime allegiance that leads an inarguabl …
Taylor Swift: The Long Pond Studio Sessions review – cosy campfire confessions Summary: Pre-pandemic, few artists were so keenly attuned to the music industry’s calendar as Taylor Swift. She timed her album releases for awards contention …
Judge denies Johnny Depp permission to appeal Sun libel action The Hollywood actor Johnny Depp has been refused permission to appeal after losing his high stakes libel action against the Sun over its description o …
Powderfinger's new album is a rewarding peek into the past Albums of Odds & Sods (the name the Who gave to one of the first compilations of rarities, released in 1974 in an attempt to short-circuit bootleggers …
Lorde urges climate action ahead of new book on Antarctica trip The singer Lorde has written an impassioned entreaty for the world to face the climate emergency head-on after visiting Antarctica. Lorde said Donald …
The Night Porter: Nazi porn or daring arthouse eroticism? Movie romances traditionally have what’s called a “meet cute”, that clinching moment when a couple-to-be first bump into one another. It would be hard …
Mads Mikkelsen confirmed as Johnny Depp's replacement in Fantastic Beasts 3 Warner Bros Pictures has confirmed James Bond star Mads Mikkelsen will take over the role of dark wizard Gellert Grindelwald from Johnny Depp in the t …
Uncle Frank review – fervent family drama from writer of American Beauty Alan Ball will probably always be known as the Oscar-winning screenwriter of the 1999 hit American Beauty, though he saw his original script curtailed …
Audrey review – a poor Breakfast at Tiffany's with too many waffles There are some heartfelt moments in this documentary portrait of Audrey Hepburn, with touching contributions from her son Sean Hepburn Ferrer, and gra …
British-only passport holders barred from playing Prince William in new film British actors will be barred from auditioning to play Prince William in a forthcoming film, because of new restrictions introduced after the country …
Black actor sues Hollywood studio over removal from Couples Retreat poster Cuban-American actor Faizon Love has launched legal action against Hollywood studio Universal, saying he was cut out of the poster for the 2009 comedy …
Drake calls for Grammys to be replaced after snubbing Black artists Drake has called for the Grammys be replaced with “something new that we can build up over time and pass on to the generations to come”, after it fail …
Viggo Mortensen on Falling star Lance Henriksen: ‘He’s like a wolf who might gobble you up’ Viggo Mortensen first met Lance Henriksen when he shot him dead. Mortensen, the Lord of the Rings star and three-time best actor Oscar nominee, was fa …
Regards sur l'Infini review – glowing, intriguing French chamber music For most chamber music partners, 2020 has been a year of jarring discontinuity, but for a few – those with a spare room, no family commitments and the …
‘Take what’s in front of you’: Erthlings on tackling uncertainty – and the HSC – amid a pandemic When Jessame Stepto left class one day in late March, her whole year group was “standing there in tears”, she says. Her inner-city Sydney school had t …
'People in their 40s were crying': the sad final days of New York's coolest record store A lot of skulking went on at Other Music, the celebrated New York record store. It was an odd kind of dance: nervous customers, hiding behind CD racks …
Ellie & Abbie (& Ellie’s Dead Aunt) review – delightful and distinctive queer romcom There are two love stories in Monica Zanetti’s queer teen romcom, Ellie & Abbie (& Ellie’s Dead Aunt). One, of course, is the budding romance between …
Nile Rodgers' guitar and a £10,000 prog rock box set: auctions fight for UK music If you’re the wealthy offspring or partner of a prog rock fan, the ultimate Christmas present idea has appeared: a £10,000 box set by the scene’s curr …
Miley Cyrus: Plastic Hearts review – too plastic, but has heart Summary: Six years ago, Miley Cyrus’s Bangerz tour arrived in London. It was as ludicrous and ludicrously entertaining a stadium pop show as anyone is ever lik …
Flohio: No Panic No Pain review – rapper leaves no mould unbroken Flohio escapes labels. In fact, she actively contests them, asserting she’s not a grime artist as so many observers assume London rappers are. Since 2 …
From Nurse Ratched to Joker: 10 of the best movie villains The Sheriff of Nottingham Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves (1991) For pure thespy, campy naughtiness, Alan Rickman excelled himself as the heartless Sher …
‘It took me three days to get over the orgy scene’: Muscle star Craig Fairbrass Summary: Craig Fairbrass has made a career from giving a certain type of person exactly what they want. His films have titles such as Deranged and Hijacked and …
The Night Porter review – descent into sex and Nazism still chills Mixed feelings are the only ones possible about the rerelease of Liliana Cavani’s 1974 shocker The Night Porter, a ripe piece of upper-middlebrow arth …
Endless summer: why sunny, out-of-season albums are in this winter A pox upon those smug sweater-weather fans who are still strangely horny for pumpkin spiced lattes after all these years. As seasonal Stockholm syndro …
Black Beauty review – gender-swapped classic makes Beauty a 'mare The children’s classic Black Beauty gets another screen adaptation, this time from Disney: a modern-ish take in which the young human heroine is seen …
Classical highlights for the week ahead: 27 November - 4 December Australian Chamber Orchestra The Barbican continues its association with Richard Tognetti and his outstanding band with a three-day digital residency. …
Jacob Collier: 'weirdo' Brit to battle for Grammy album of the year He has been compared to Mozart by Chris Martin and likened to Bernstein by BBC Proms director David Pickard. Until this week, however, Jacob Collier w …
Classical home listening: Schumann and Schubert string quartets and more • Robert Schumann, who suffered mood swings and periods of severe mental instability, wrote his three string quartets in the “miracle” year of 1842. T …
The week in classical: Ariodante; Royal Northern Sinfonia; BCMG; HCMF; Bath Mozart festival – review Elation at the miracles star musicians can achieve in an empty theatre; regret at not being there in person – both reactions made watching the Royal O …
One to watch: Porij Squeaky-new foursome Porij (as in porridge) became a proper band quicker than they’d planned. Eggy (vocals and keys), Tommy (vocals and guitar), Jammo …
Gabriel Latchin Trio: I'll Be Home for Christmas review – the gift that keeps on giving For my money, London-born Gabriel Latchin is the best straight-ahead jazz pianist to appear in the past few years. Polished technique we now take as n …
Greatest Southern Nights featuring Ocean Alley review – Australia's live music comeback is a tepid affair Even before arriving on a filthily hot day to Sydney’s Olympic Park, the adjectives about Saturday night’s big gig have been beefed up into superlativ …
Darth Vader actor Dave Prowse dies aged 85 David “Dave” Prowse, the actor best known for playing Darth Vader in the original Star Wars trilogy, has died at the age of 85, his agent has said. Ag …
Possessor review – mind-and-body-snatching thrills from Brandon Cronenberg Anyone feeling nostalgic for the 70s/80s heyday of squishy, sociopolitical body-horror will find plenty to feast on in this uproariously gory yet sati …
Miley Cyrus: Plastic Hearts review – mock rock Throughout a decade careening gleefully from pop to R&B to country, Miley Cyrus has needed no urging to drop a rock cover. Her unforced simpatico for …
Julien Temple: 'People who are considered difficult are very rich subjects for a film' When film-maker Julien Temple met Shane MacGowan to discuss making a documentary about his life, the 62-year-old, hard-living former Pogues frontman w …
Hillbilly Elegy review – Glenn Close and Amy Adams trade Appalachian cliches “Your people will have your back. That’s our code,” insists Yale law student JD Vance (Gabriel Basso), reflecting on the Appalachian values of his Ken …
Smashing Pumpkins: Cyr review – infinite flatness Summary: Although Smashing Pumpkins are no strangers to synths, they have always remained a guitar band at heart. And yet Cyr, the second album since three-qua …
David Prowse obituary Cinema audiences were introduced to the terrifying Darth Vader when he appeared through the smoky residue of a laser battle at the beginning of Star W …
Jungleland review – a neon-lit squint at the American dream Fed up of ducking bailiffs and squatting in abandoned houses, brothers Stan (Charlie Hunnam) and Lion (Jack O’Connell) leave western Massachusetts and …
Flohio: No Panic No Pain – a seething statement of intent Since she first pricked up ears with her impish flow and shadowy beats four years ago, 28-year-old south Londoner Flohio has always given the impressi …
Don't go breaking my art: it's time to axe the mood-ruining, bar-scrambling interval Summary: When my book Rough Ideas was published last year I, like everyone else on the planet, had no idea how much and how quickly life in 2020 would change w …
I raised my kids on Pixar – and it has ruined classic cinema for them Summary: I was recently scrolling through Christmas films at the cinema opposite the kids’ school, picturing the happy scene where I arrive unexpectedly outsid …
Michael Brooks obituary My father, Michael Brooks, who has died aged 85, was a Grammy award-winning archivist, historian and producer who introduced American roots music to a …
Desperately seeking headbangers: the lonely hearts who found love in the back pages From headbangers in Hastings to new romantics in Norwich, pen pals and lonely hearts columns were a staple of music magazines from the 1970s to the 19 …
The 20 best songs of 2020 We kick off our end of 2020 music coverage with Guardian critics’ favourite songs, with our album of the year countdown starting tomorrow. As ever, ea …
The best song of 2020: Rain on Me by Lady Gaga and Ariana Grande Behind the illness, grief, political failure, racist violence, unemployment and myriad other acutely painful moments, 2020’s lesser sin is that it has …
And the Oscar goes to ... a movie by a streaming platform? Usually at this time of year, thoughts are turning to awards season and an enticing winter of quality cinema ahead, but – and you’re probably utterly …
Multiverse of Madness? Why the Marvel Cinematic Universe no longer exists in perfect isolation Summary: The internet briefly looked up from its coffee and raised an eyebrow last week when Doctor Strange director Scott Derrickson appeared to confirm that …
Enemies of the sheeple: why do pop stars fall for conspiracy theories? In the Guide’s weekly Solved! column, we look into a crucial pop-culture question you’ve been burning to know the answer to – and settle it, once and …
Guy Garvey says music fans should pay more for streaming services Summary: Music fans have to be prepared to pay more for the songs they love in the streaming age, according to Elbow’s Guy Garvey, who says the next generation …
Stereophonics: how we made Dakota Kelly Jones, singer/songwriter A lot of early Stereophonics songs were written while I was working in the market back in Cwmaman. Some afternoons, you …
My Psychedelic Love Story: how Errol Morris captured an unusual romance Summary: Errol Morris calls it the Rosencrantz and Guildenstern approach to history. “Don’t interview Hamlet,” says the Oscar-winning documentary maker. “He’s …
Dick Ross obituary Richard Ross, my mentor and friend of 40 years, who has died aged 84, was a passionate, kind-hearted intellectual and a pre-eminent figure in film edu …
Rita Ora likely to escape fine for breaking lockdown with party The singer Rita Ora is likely to escape a personal fine after breaching Covid rules to attend her birthday party at a Notting Hill restaurant, but the …
Nigerian pop star Davido: 'Africans were made fun of. Now everyone wants us' The buoyant, trumpeting chords of Fem, the opening track on Davido’s fourth album, A Better Time, suggest an artist who is vivacious, free of self-dou …
K-pop stars BTS extend career by two years after military service law change Summary: A change in South Korean law has effectively extended the lifespan of the boyband BTS, currently the world’s most successful pop group. South Korean m …
Nick Cave accuses BBC of 'mutilating' Fairytale of New York Nick Cave has accused the BBC of “mutilating” Fairytale of New York, following the broadcaster’s recent decision to play a censored version of the Pog …
The Godfather Coda: The Death of Michael Corleone review – Coppola edits the past Summary: Just when you thought you were out … he pulls you back in. Francis Ford Coppola has presided over different editorial remixes of Apocalypse Now, and n …
My Day review – homeless teenager runs straight into trouble First-time feature director Ibrahim Miiro hits the ground running with this urban drama set in London; for the first half-hour, at least, it’s a film …
Billie Eilish talks to younger Billie Eilish – with both wisdom and wit In 2009, a website went viral – it allowed you to send yourself a message that would automatically turn up in your inbox three years later. A friend o …
Musicians fear reprisals for speaking to MPs' streaming inquiry A Commons select committee has warned that no one should interfere with its inquiry into the economics of music streaming, after witnesses expressed f …
The Avalanches' teenage obsessions: 'I cried hearing Strawberry Fields Forever' Tony Di Blasi My first guitar When I went to high school we had one free term of extracurricular activities – I chose guitar. I wouldn’t say it was li …
The EU anthem: Ode to Joy – archive, 1972 Joyful Europe 20 January 1972 The Council of Europe has selected the prelude to Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony as the official Hymn of Europe, and it will …
Liberté review – gruesome night in the woods as French aristos go dogging Albert Serra’s Liberté, or Liberty, is a gruesome midsummer night’s dream of Sadeian horror in which a bunch of verbose bewigged libertines in the 18t …
'My coolness has disintegrated': how pop stars cope with fatherhood This summer, two of the world’s biggest pop stars became parents for the first time. Katy Perry told an interviewer that after becoming pregnant, “a l …
One-Way to Moscow review – lighthearted Swiss spy cop comedy Here’s an undemanding lighthearted comedy from Switzerland loosely inspired by a real-life spying scandal in the late 1980s, when it emerged that Swis …
Elliot Page: star of Juno and X-Men announces he is transgender Elliot Page, who rose to fame as the lead in teen pregnancy comedy Juno as Ellen Page, has announced he is transgender. “Hi friends,” he wrote on a va …
Without Ethel Smyth and classical music's forgotten women, we only tell half the story Summary: In 1934, all of musical England gathered to celebrate the 75th birthday of one the country’s most famous composers – Dame Ethel Smyth. During a festiv …
Faith review – knockout doc on a sinister Catholic kung-fu cult This documentary will be the last film we see from the Italian director Valentina Pedicini who died last month tragically young – aged 42 – from liver …
Godmothered review – Disney remixes Enchanted … minus the charm Godmothered, a Disney+ live-action refocus on the understudied role of the fairy godmother, has the foundations of movie magic working in its favor. T …
Fine Young Cannibal Roland Gift: 'I went back to where being pretty didn't matter' There are no film posters up in Roland Gift’s house in Holloway, London, and the platinum discs are all packed away. It’s a home that gives few clues …
County Lines review – dark tale of the burdens borne by drug mules Summary: “County lines” is slang for a new UK crime phenomenon that is basically as old as the hills: the targeting of vulnerable teenagers from the big city, …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the US: 50-2 50 Crip Camp One of Netflix’s many eye-opening documentaries of the year takes a look at a freewheeling camp for disabled people which turned into a r …
Shawn Mendes: Wonder review – pop's nicest man needs a personality ‘Why are we wasting time?” wailed Shawn Mendes on Treat You Better, the multiplatinum hit from his last album, Illuminate. It’s a sentiment you find y …
'We're the UK's biggest boy band!' Michael Ball and Alfie Boe, the new kings of Christmas “We’ve topped the charts more than Wham! or Chas & Dave? We’re a mixture of them both,” jokes Michael Ball. I have just informed Ball and Alfie Boe th …
Golijov: Falling Out of Time review – meditation on grief is an allusive patchwork In the early years of this century, the Argentinian Osvaldo Golijov was one of the most sought-after composers around. In works such as the choral St …
Warner Bros to launch its 2021 movies simultaneously on HBO Max and in cinemas Summary: Warner Brothers has announced that their 2021 slate of releases, including high-profile films such as Dune and The Matrix 4, will premiere on the stre …
Genesis Owusu, Missy Higgins, Kymie and more: Australia's best new music for December Missy Higgins – When the Machine Starts For fans of: Something for Kate, Lorde, Clare Bowditch Expectations have been the bane of Missy Higgins’ caree …
‘Chadwick will be remembered as a hero’: Denzel Washington and Viola Davis on making Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom Summary: One of the most powerful moments in Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom comes when Levee, the firebrand trumpeter played by the late Chadwick Boseman, gets into …
Muscle review – banter, biceps and brutally black comedy Gerard Johnson, writer-director of the serial-killer flick Tony and the corrupt-cop thriller Hyena, both set in London, travels 300 miles north to con …
Mobo founder Kanya King: 'I’ve been fighting to break down barriers. It's isolating' Summary: “It was almost like the world had woken up,” says Kanya King, the Mobos founder, who is discussing an open letter she sent to the culture secretary, O …
Burd Ellen: Says the Never Beyond review – brilliant wintersongs make an eerie snowglobe of sound And so it is Christmas. Here’s what Burd Ellen have done: made a brilliant set of wintersongs from all across Britain that almost hovers in the air li …
Rico Nasty: Nightmare Vacation review – offbeat rapper is impossible to ignore Rico Nasty has never played nice: as her moniker suggests, she’s aggressive, in your face, and refuses to back down. Having amassed a strong cult foll …
A Christmas Carol review – clever multimedia reworking of Dickens From Jacqui and David Morris, the brother-sister duo who brought us 2018’s authoritative Nureyev documentary, comes this dance-based adaptation of a c …
Diane Lane's teenage obsessions: 'I'm still scarred by A Clockwork Orange' A Clockwork Orange, aged nine I was the child actor in a travelling experimental theatre company, La MaMa. We were the American entry in these summer …
Crock of Gold: A Few Rounds with Shane MacGowan review – a sombre salute This full-length profile of the former Pogues frontman Shane MacGowan emerges just as the annual debate over the lyrics of his biggest hit, Fairytale …
One two, one two: the Scottish bands teaming up to support roadies This has been a tough year for musicians, but it has been even harder on their road crews. The guitar wranglers, tech magicians and flightcase-luggers …
How did Bad Bunny become the world's biggest pop star? Each December, Spotify announces who has been the world’s most streamed artist that year, and this generally tallies with who has been popular in the …
Classical highlights for the week ahead:  4 - 11 December Royal Northern Sinfonia The Third Symphony by Louise Farrenc, composed in 1847, is given a rare performance. The conductor Duncan Ward programmes it a …
The Creatures of Prometheus – Philharmonia's fun and witty take on Beethoven's ballet The Philharmonia is marking this year’s Beethoven anniversary with a rare complete outing for The Creatures of Prometheus, Beethoven’s only ballet, fi …
One-star wonders: how to make a film that’s so bad it’s good There is nothing quite like a good-bad movie. Sometimes the title alone is enough to let us know what we’re in for: think Attack of the 50 Foot Woman …
From Messiah to Jonas Kaufmann: the best classical Christmas albums of 2020 This year’s heap of Christmas albums is smaller, but the balance has shifted: plenty of novelty and baroque discovery from outstanding choirs, only on …
The Sixteen: A Choral Odyssey review – an inspired journey through music and history The Sixteen made a smart decision in choosing Simon Russell Beale as guide to their online A Choral Odyssey, a series of filmed performances in differ …
One to watch: King Hannah Lessons in how to set tables don’t often feature in bands’ creation myths, but that was the catalyst that brought the core members of Liverpool’s King …
Mank review: David Fincher's sumptuous ode to old Hollywood Summary: David Fincher’s messy, often brilliant Mank, which follows Hollywood screenwriter Herman J Mankiewicz (Gary Oldman) as he wrestles with the screenplay …
M Ward: Think of Spring review – a spectral tribute to Billie Holiday West coast singer-songwriter Matthew Ward stalks Americana circles in many guises; as solo artist, guitarist to Norah Jones, collaborator with the lik …
Rita Ora apologises for second breach of Covid lockdown restrictions British singer Rita Ora has apologised after reports emerged that she should have been self-isolating when she celebrated her birthday at a London res …
County Lines review – a deep dive into Britain's drugs trade hell “You know what the ‘acceptable loss’ of your business is?” a social worker asks a teenager caught in Britain’s brutal “county lines” drug-trafficking …
Crock of Gold review – Shane MacGowan's colourful, chaotic life Summary: A lifelong chronicler of punk and of music’s excessive, transgressive fringes, it’s a wonder that it took Julien Temple as long as it did to turn his …
Peter Pickering obituary Peter Pickering, who has died aged 96, was once one of Britain’s busiest film-makers. Directing hundreds of shorts between 1942 and 1983, he made more …
Sigur Rós: Odin's Raven Magic – bold orchestral manoeuvres from 2004 If the road to hell is indeed paved with discarded copies of rock artists’ inglorious forays into classical music, from Deep Purple to Sting, then at …
Steve Turney obituary Summary: My friend Steve Turney, who has died aged 59 of Covid-19, was a publicist in the film and television world who in more recent times became a TV sales …
Liam Gallagher: Down By the River Thames review – barging through his back catalogue Other livestreams have sold themselves on everything from dazzling displays of the latest technology or promises they could somehow recreate the atmos …
Falling review – Viggo Mortensen's powerful drama of a father with dementia The directorial debut of Viggo Mortensen, which he also wrote and stars in, is an empathetic but gruelling account of a father-son relationship. Neari …
Rico Nasty: Nightmare Vacation review – a pummelling debut Summary: If 2020 is our nightmare vacation from normal life, then Maryland 23-year-old Rico Nasty is an entertainingly misfit holiday rep. On her debut album, …
Open thread: What's the perfect song to play as this terrible year ends? How do you farewell a year like 2020? By screaming increasingly vulgar profanities until it goes away? By celebrating its final demise with as many pe …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the UK, No 10: Never Rarely Sometimes Always Never Rarely Sometimes Always, writer-director Eliza Hittman’s reticent, watchful film on two 17-year-old girls’ journey across state lines for an abo …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 10: Moses Sumney – Græ Moses Sumney’s music is often two things at once. Intimate yet communal, spiritual yet lustful, his piercingly clear falsetto is interchangeable with …
UK music streaming startup backed by Kylie secures £13m funding Summary: A British music streaming startup backed by Kylie Minogue and Robbie Williams has secured multimillion-pound funding from investors including the form …
A moment of pride: why 2020 has been a big year for the lesbian movie “Let’s see what’s trending,” says Nicole Kidman, scrolling through Twitter in Ryan Murphy’s new musical The Prom. Kidman’s character and her washed-up …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the US: No 10 – The Nest “In order to be successful, one must project an image of success at all times.” That little pearl of ladder-climber wisdom comes to us from American B …
Here Awhile review – assisted-dying drama weighed down by cliche Summary: ”Here’s to life and all its messy complications!” Cancer is a bitch, life is a journey and other horribly pat sentiments are all given free airing in …
No Hard Feelings review – life lessons and love stories in a refugee shelter The winner of the Berlin film festival’s Teddy award for best queer-themed film begins as shuffling character study, then broadens out to resemble Jul …
Spitalfields music festival: At Home review This year’s Spitalfields Music, like so many festivals, took to the digisphere with a varied sequence of performances and talk programmed across a sin …
Royal Northern Sinfonia/Ward review – elegance and a Farrenc gem The Royal Northern Sinfonia’s autumn series of livestreamed concerts has made a point of including at least one rarely heard work in every programme, …
How Dionne Warwick became the queen of Twitter (with a little help from Chance the Rapper) Name: Dionne Warwick. Age: 80 next week. Status: Queen of Twitter. Don’t you mean one of the greatest pop singers of all time? That was then. This is …
Rupert Webster obituary Summary: My friend Rupert Webster’s first public appearance was aged 12 as the beautiful, shy blond boy in Lindsay Anderson’s 1968 film If, a biting satire on …
Cup of Cheer review – overstuffed Christmas turkey The syrupy Hallmark Christmas movie isn’t exactly top of the list for pressing satirical targets – but we’re getting a parody anyway, courtesy of this …
Bob Dylan sells entire publishing catalogue to Universal Music Bob Dylan has sold his entire catalogue of 600 songs, including Blowin’ in the Wind and Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door, to Universal Music in the biggest m …
Bob Dylan's rights sale all part of his freewheelin' approach to business The estimated figure is pretty mind-blowing – at over $300m (£225m), it dwarfs the $22m he got for extending his publishing contract in 2010 – but it …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the UK, No 9: Mank Summary: Even if Citizen Kane’s lustre has dulled a little (it’s no longer top of the Sight and Sound critics poll, after decades of supremacy), it is still th …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 9: Taylor Swift – Folklore We’ve all thought it this year: wouldn’t it be nice to escape to a cabin in the woods, to reconnect with nature, nourishing ourselves and our creative …
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon at 20: a rare action movie with heart When Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon was released 20 years ago, it was the culmination of a cultural exchange between east and west, and a glimpse into …
'It's been a battle to express my personality': Munya Chawawa, Instagram's finest satirist Summary: Any time there’s an incident that highlights the racism in British public life, Munya Chawawa will have skewered it while it’s still trending. The lig …
Neil Young drops lawsuit against Donald Trump Neil Young’s lawsuit against Donald Trump, filed in opposition to his music being used in campaign rallies, has been dismissed by a New York court. Th …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the US: No 9 – Never Rarely Sometimes Always Never Rarely Sometimes Always, writer-director Eliza Hittman’s reticent, watchful film on two 17-year-old girls’ journey across state lines for an abo …
A wing and a prayer: the enduring beauty of The Lark Ascending Summary: It’s easy to make fun of The Lark Ascending. Perennially top of Classic FM’s Hall of Fame, it has become a byword for the conservatism of both schedul …
Christopher Nolan leads industry fury over Warner Bros' streaming move Tenet director Christopher Nolan is leading a chorus of furious protest from the film industry over Warner Bros’ decision to release its entire 2021 s …
Dare to Dream review – Berlin movie love story waltzes around the Wall Summary: This German romantic drama – a handsome commercial for Studio Babelsberg, near Berlin, the world’s oldest major film studio, as well as for cinephilia …
Us Among the Stones review – thoughtful Laurence Fox stars in heartfelt indie drama There’s no point in a fictional family reunion where long-buried resentments don’t painfully but cathartically resurface – and maybe no point in such …
The Furnace review – David Wenham's gold thief traverses harsh outback morality Summary: A sunburnt and badly wounded David Wenham, looking haggard and sounding hoarse but radiating as much gravitas as ever, slogs across outback Australia …
Letter: Des O’Connor was an enormously kind man Summary: Working with Des O’Connor, as I did when producing an album for him, was a delight. He would have us laughing as soon as he arrived. He once told the …
Gerry Bates obituary Summary: My friend Gerry Bates, who has died aged 78, was a well-known member of the folk music and dance scene in Sheffield: a dancer and squire of Sheffield …
US composer Harold Budd dies aged 84 Summary: Harold Budd, the left-field American composer whose work straddled minimalism, jazz, dream-pop and more, has died aged 84. A post on his official Face …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 8: J Hus – Big Conspiracy With his 2017 debut album, Common Sense, east London artist J Hus made a visceral impact. Nominated for the Mercury prize as well as pretty much every …
US rapper A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie arrested on gun and drug charges Chart-topping US rapper A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie has been arrested and charged over gun and drug offences. The 25-year-old rapper, real name Artist Juli …
'I'm a song catcher': 60 years of Arhoolie Records, the label for a lost America This year, 3 November saw two momentous events take place in the US: American voters chose Joe Biden for president and Arhoolie Records turned 60. I p …
Space Dogs: Return to Earth review – Russian canine astronauts make feeble third go of it In 1960, as part of the Soviet space programme, a pair of dogs named Belka and Strelka became the first Earth-born creatures to go into orbit and retu …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the US: No 8 – Mank Even if Citizen Kane’s lustre has dulled a little (it’s no longer top of the Sight & Sound critics poll, after decades of supremacy), it is still the …
Saint Maud leads British independent film award nominations Psychological horror Saint Maud has emerged at the front of the pack for the British independent film awards (Bifas), closely followed by supernatural …
Shawn Mendes: 'The fear strangled me. I really fell down' Shawn Mendes had a simple ambition. He wanted to be the biggest pop star in the world. At the age of 14, he taught himself guitar from YouTube videos. …
Rose Island review – Netflix micronation comedy short on eccentricity This lightweight Italian comedy-drama is a story from the strange-but-true archives; in 1968, young engineer Giorgio Rosa built an island half a kilom …
The Midnight Sky review – beardy George Clooney marooned in bland cosmic yarn Encountering an acquaintance in London’s Piccadilly in the mid-1970s, Alec Guinness is said to have remarked, with a self-effacing smile, that he was …
James Corden proves why straight actors should think twice before playing gay Summary: Whenever the debate over whether straight actors should be allowed to play gay characters has reared its head (and with time, that’s gone from every y …
Silent Night review – British crime thriller set in drab exurbs This modestly budgeted but not unambitious crime thriller set in the deep exurbs of London stars Bradley Taylor as Mark, an ex-con with the angry frig …
Harold Budd's sublime music was a gateway to a brighter world It’s no coincidence that so many people discovered Harold Budd’s music this year. Restrained and sedate – even sedative – the disembodied drones and r …
Cocoon review – seductive coming-of-age story full of reveries Summary: This is nothing to do with Ron Howard’s movie about Don Ameche being rejuvenated by aliens. German director Leonie Krippendorff has created a coming-o …
Curses! Nicolas Cage to examine history of swearwords for Netflix Nicolas Cage is to host a six-part series for Netflix investigating the history of swearwords. Each episode with focus on a particular expletive: “fuc …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 7: Haim – Women in Music Pt III “As soon as you stop looking, you’ll find it.” This is something that single people in search of love always get told, and it’s very annoying – doubly …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the UK, No 7: Saint Maud What a strange, contained, audacious film this is. Rose Glass’s silken debut hit headlines with a Tenet-beating box office performance in October, but …
Il Mio Corpo review – a taste of common humanity under Sicily's burning sun The title could allude to mass in the church in which some scenes are set (“Take, eat, this is my body”). But the bodies are more secular in this rath …
Dreamland review – Margot Robbie hits the bank in twist on Bonnie and Clyde A lonely kid in a 1930s Texas dustbowl town dreams of adventure. Then it all comes to life when a fugitive bank robber, badly wounded, shows up and hi …
The Mole Agent review – care-home spy uncovers wells of loneliness There are moments of sweetness and sadness in Maite Alberdi’s documentary about an old people’s care home in Chile. But I couldn’t make friends with t …
Paul McCartney: McCartney III review – lockdown LP has his best songs in years History suggests that critics should consider treading carefully when it comes to McCartney III. Its two predecessors, 1970’s McCartney and 1980’s McC …
The 20 best body-swap films – ranked! 20. Nine Lives (2016) Before we begin, we need to make the distinction between body-swap films and body-switch films. A body-swap film is a film in wh …
Taylor Swift announces second surprise album of 2020, Evermore Taylor Swift has announced her second surprise album of 2020, entitled Evermore. Swift describes the 17-track LP as a “sister album” to Folklore, rele …
Songbird review – Hollywood's first Covid thriller is a technical triumph The news that not one but multiple Covid-19 vaccines are on the way to pharmacies and hospitals worldwide came as a relief to us all, a confirmation t …
Beethoven: The Piano Trios review – Barenboim revisits past glories Summary: Daniel Barenboim spent lockdown earlier this year practising the piano. One of the fruits of that intensive work has been his fifth complete recording …
Get ready for Covid-23: making a pandemic thriller in a frightening near future What did you do over lockdown? Learn the oboe? Tick off the complete works of Proust? Bake your own weight in banana bread? British director Adam Maso …
Funny Boy review – Sri Lankan rites-of-passage tale clashes with political reality There is something a bit soapy and melodramatic about this queer coming-of-age drama from Sri Lanka, picked up by Ava DuVernay’s company Array and rel …
Alison Krauss's teenage obsessions: 'My spiked hair froze on the walk to school' Tony Rice – Cold on the Shoulder Growing up in Illinois, I didn’t have teenage angst. My parents encouraged my brother and I to speak our minds and I …
Dolly Parton says she may sell her entire back catalogue of songs Dolly Parton has said that she is considering selling her back catalogue of thousands of songs, as big name artists attract sky-high valuations for th …
Jeremy Montagu obituary Summary: My father, Jeremy Montagu, who has died aged 92, was a conductor, museum curator and author who specialised in the history and origin of musical instr …
Durgamati: The Myth review – haunted house goes under the Hammer Censorship may have been an issue in the past, but it’s striking how few horror films Indian commercial cinema has produced relative to those from oth …
Taylor Swift: Evermore – rich alt-rock and richer character studies Anyone who feels they made insufficient use of 2020’s unexpected glut of spare time is strongly advised to avoid the prologue that Taylor Swift has wr …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 6: Waxahatchee – Saint Cloud In March, Waxahatchee’s fifth album arrived accompanied by a neat narrative hook. Saint Cloud was the first record Katie Crutchfield had made since ge …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the UK, No 6: Rocks The social-realist tag is so often the signal for something worthy and burdened with its own loyalty to grimness. Nothing could be further from the tr …
'Oh cool, I don’t have to put on pants!' Stars on music's year of chaos Summary: Each year we convene pop stars to mull over the year’s big musical moments, and for 2020 this was – like almost every social or professional interacti …
Moses Farrow: ‘I’d be very happy to take my father’s surname’ Moses Farrow is talking to me, thoughtfully and carefully, about what people misunderstand about adoption. “There’s a really powerful narrative that s …
Smiley Face Killers review – a blunt blade from Bret Easton Ellis The patchy cinematic record of novelist-turned-screenwriter Bret Easton Ellis includes the classic Christian Bale-starring adaptation of American Psyc …
'If it wasn’t for us, essential workers couldn’t go to work': a film on 24/7 daycare There is rarely such a thing as a good night’s sleep for Deloris and Patrick Hogan, the operators of Dee’s Tots daycare in the NYC suburb of New Roche …
Rosie Carney: The Bends review – spirited Radiohead covers Perhaps it’s no surprise that, in 2020, many artists have indulged in the healing power of a good cover song. Marika Hackman released a dreamy LP of t …
Gossip, scandal and forgotten stars: 10 of the best books about film Easy Riders, Raging Bulls Peter Biskind A stone-cold classic from the moment it arrived in 1998. Biskind, a former editor of Premiere magazine, produc …
Sonny Rollins: Rollins in Holland review – saxophone colossus on gale-force form The creative acquisitiveness of improvisation sounds boundless in the work of jazz sax master Sonny Rollins. He turned 90 in September. Every timeless …
Disney announce 10 Star Wars and 10 Marvel series – and new films Disney has unveiled a huge slew of new projects for the next decade at an investor event. Speaking on Thursday, Lucasfilm boss Kathleen Kennedy announ …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the US: No 6 – First Cow The last thing anybody ever expected from a Kelly Reichardt film was a big, dripping, golden slab of food porn. Three decades into her career, the Ame …
Tracks of the week reviewed: Christmas singles special Summary: Robbie Williams Can’t Stop Christmas Williams is rereleasing his Christmas album from – checks notes – last year, with the addition of this pub rock, …
Crowd-created TikTok phenomenon Ratatouille the musical is coming to Broadway It’s a sentence that seemed impossible just a few days ago, and would have made zero sense any time before this year. But, in a series of events as un …
Mariah Carey v Wham! – who should finally get their festive No 1? Story of the song All I Want for Christmas Is You Mariah Carey’s 1994 hit sounds as if it was blessed with the twinkling stardust that seems to be fal …
Songs for Europe: what music did Bowie and Iggy listen to in 1970s Berlin? David Bowie once described his 1970s Berlin trilogy – Low, “Heroes” and Lodger – as containing “a sense of yearning for a future that we all knew woul …
Before Carry On typecast her, Barbara Windsor was a brilliant kitchen sink star For a certain generation, she is pub landlady Peggy Mitchell in the BBC TV soap EastEnders, commanding wrongdoers to get out of the Queen Vic with the …
Controversial South Korean director Kim Ki-duk dies of Covid aged 59 Controversial South Korean film-maker Kim Ki-duk has died aged 59 in a Latvian hospital, where he was being treated for Covid-19. The news was initial …
Kim Ki-duk:  punk-Buddhist shock, violence – and hypnotic beauty too Of all the film-makers of what might loosely be called the new Asian wave of the 21st century, perhaps the most challenging and mysterious – and proba …
Mariah Carey's All I Want for Christmas Is You reaches UK No 1 after 26 years Mariah Carey has finally topped the UK charts with her widely beloved festive hit All I Want for Christmas Is You, 26 years after it was first release …
FKA twigs sues Shia LaBeouf for physical, mental and emotional abuse The musician FKA twigs (real name Tahliah Debrett Barnett) is suing the actor Shia LaBeouf for allegedly subjecting her to physical, emotional and men …
Magic Mike Live: how the 'feverish spectacle' survived a pandemic – and made it to Australia Magic Mike Live doesn’t seem like the kind of show that would survive a pandemic. The global dance spectacular, inspired by the 2012 film of the same …
Streaming: Tenet and other time-travel films to lose yourself in Usually in December, home entertainment columnists would be flooded with big-name blockbusters from earlier in the year, out in time for Christmas and …
Classical home listening: lockdown discs from Igor Levit, Daumants Liepiņš and Bayreuth • Every recording from Igor Levit, the Russian-born, Berlin-based pianist, is an event (in fact this “event’ was launched in September but thanks to C …
The week in classical: Live from London Christmas; Louis Andriessen premiere – review Amid the blizzard of images crazing our senses this year, one stood out last week: an elite choral ensemble from Oakwood, Alabama – the Aeolians – sin …
Paul McCartney: McCartney III review – light from the bunker The song that closes Paul McCartney’s latest solo album transcribes the to-do list of a man living a simpler life. Foxes are scaring the hens and lamb …
Andrew Weatherall remembered by David Holmes I’ll start by saying that DJing, remixing and producing were just something that Andrew did. I always looked at him as a much bigger presence. Spendin …
The Midnight Sky review – George Clooney's post-apocalyptic thriller Director George Clooney’s moving and deeply melancholy post-apocalyptic sci-fi imagines him as the last man on Earth. The planet has been evacuated an …
Dexter Gordon: Montmartre 1964 review – a genius abroad The American tenor saxophonist Dexter Gordon (1923-90) first came to Europe in 1962 for a two-week gig at Ronnie Scott’s, and decided to stay for a wh …
George Clooney: Why we owe our domestic bliss to ... Boris Johnson George Clooney will not be sending Boris Johnson a Christmas card, but he may send a thank-you note to No 10 – along with a comb, he told the Observer …
Even Wonder Woman won’t save cinemas this year Wonder Woman 1984 is set to make its British big-screen premiere this week, and for cinema owners it marks the last chance to salvage something from a …
Country superstar Charley Pride dies aged 86 Summary: The singer Charley Pride, the first black superstar of country music, died on Saturday at the age of 86. His publicist confirmed that Pride died on 12 …
Ma Rainey's Black Bottom review – Chadwick Boseman and Viola Davis share the spotlight In 2016, Denzel Washington produced, directed and starred in the screen adaptation of August Wilson’s 1985 play Fences, earning a supporting actress O …
David Byrne: 'Spike Lee and I have a lot in common' David Byrne is one of popular culture’s great polymaths: a musician, producer, artist, actor, author, record label owner and film-maker. He was a foun …
I'm Your Woman review – Rachel Brosnahan stars in plodding neo-noir thriller “It’s your baby,” says mobster Eddie (Bill Heck), inexplicably plonking a strange crying infant into the lap of his wife, Jean (The Marvelous Mrs Mais …
Sean Connery remembered by Jackie Stewart When people think of Sean of course they think of James Bond, but he wasn’t really acting when he was playing that part. In real life, when he walked …
The Avalanches: We Will Always Love You review – multilayered, blissed-out psychedelia It took Melbourne’s Avalanches 16 years to follow up the dazzling cut-and-paste alchemy of their debut, Since I Left You. When it did finally arrive, …
Il Mio Corpo review – Intimate view of Sicily's poverty Under the baking sun and his father’s beady eye, Sicilian pre-teen Oscar scavenges for scrap metal on a mountainside. Among the piles of rubbish, he c …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the UK, No 5: Portrait of a Lady on Fire I’d been briefed that Portrait of a Lady on Fire was good. That it was cerebral as well as sexy, beautifully shot and acted and brilliantly scripted. …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 5: Sault – Untitled (Black Is) In a recent essay for Harper’s magazine the author Garth Greenwell wrote about his problem with creating work that is described as “relevant”. He argu …
A year without superheroes: has Covid broken our obsession? Doesn’t it feel like a lifetime ago that Marvel’s Avengers said their goodbyes, having saved the world for good this time? Didn’t last long, did it? N …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the US: No 5 – The Father It’s rare to encounter a film like The Father, a sterling, Oscar-worthy chamber piece of inarguably high quality but one that I would hesitate before …
The don of disillusionment: John le Carré on film I met John le Carré once, in 2016; appropriately enough, it was in Berlin where the TV adaptation of The Night Manager was getting a showcase premiere …
Jesy Nelson leaves Little Mix to focus on mental health Summary: Jesy Nelson has quit Little Mix, the UK pop quartet who have topped the British singles chart four times since forming on The X Factor in 2011. Announ …
Will Young tells inquest: caring for my brother became too much Will Young has described how years spent caring for his twin brother, who struggled with depression and addiction, became too much and he eventually f …
The 50  best albums of 2020, No 4: Perfume Genius – Set My Heart on Fire Immediately Every Perfume Genius album marks some kind of transition. When singer Mike Hadreas released his 2010 debut, the intimate, introspective Learning, he e …
Earliest known Church of England hymn by female composer found Summary: Another jigsaw piece in the history of female composers has been slotted into place with the discovery of the earliest known Church of England anthem …
Jesy Nelson: abuse has cruelly silenced one of pop's few unfiltered voices I first interviewed Little Mix in 2012, not long after they’d won The X Factor, the first girl band to do so. At that point they had one song to their …
The Macaluso Sisters review – aftermath of a tragedy in scorching drama An almost unbearable sadness settles like the sunset on this beautifully composed tale of how a tragic accident in childhood poisons four adult lives; …
Un Film Dramatique review – French youngsters get their say “Do you have as good a chance of becoming president as someone from a fancy neighbourhood?” A teenage girl is interviewing a boy in her class. They’re …
Farewell Amor review – humane and skilful Angolan diaspora tale Tanzanian-American writer-director Ekwa Msangi makes her feature debut with this warmly humane film after an apprenticeship in shorts, and it’s an aus …
Top bun: Tom Cruise's cake-mailing habit proves he's a real Christmas miracle Tom Cruise follows me on Twitter. Until now, I have been relatively proud of this fact, even though he follows tens of thousands of people, and only t …
'All they want is my voice': the real story of 'Mother of the Blues'  Ma Rainey When Florene Dawkins helped come to the rescue of a house that once belonged to Ma Rainey, the “Mother of the Blues”, it was boarded up, frequented by …
Charley Pride obituary Summary: A fine baritone voice and friendly, graceful manner ensured that Charley Pride, who has died at the age of 86 from complications related to Covid-19, …
Sundance 2021: a low-key lineup announced for semi-virtual festival The 2020 Sundance film festival will be a stripped back, mostly virtual edition following in the footsteps of other festivals that have been forced to …
David Oyelowo: 'Nowhere on Earth has been better at covering up racism than Great Britain' David Oyelowo is tired of talking about racism. After all, he has spent a professional lifetime doing so – not surprisingly, as this has been the focu …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the UK, No 3: Clemency Summary: In any year, there are films that mysteriously don’t seem to click with the awards establishment and don’t get the glittering prizes they deserve, whi …
Let the music play: classical music and opera in 2020 When I left the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London after Pierre-Laurent Aimard’s recital on 10 March, I little imagined that it would be the last “normal” …
Match made in heaven? Why Taylor Swift is a Brazilian football team’s unofficial mascot Name: The Taylor Swift Rule. Age: 14. Appearance: Like hundreds of thousands of screaming Brazilians. Oh no, she is not culturally appropriating again …
The Woman Who Ran review – a movie-novella with a sensational meaning The cinema of Korean director Hong Sang-soo is seductively low-key and lo-fi, and his latest is a movie-novella in three encounters. It’s so downbeat, …
Greenland review – Gerard Butler v comet in solid disaster thriller In a year when many of us obsessed over anti-escapist films about disasters engulfing the world while also being presented with a junkier than usual l …
The Racer review – Tour de France takes the tablets In 1998, a doping scandal rocked the Tour de France when a team masseur was caught with a pharmacy of banned substances in the boot of his car before …
Jiu Jitsu review – Nicolas Cage gives it his all in mortal extra-terrestrial combat The entertainingly frazzled presence of Nicolas Cage provides a reason to pay some attention – but not much – to this otherwise uninspired and by-the- …
The 50 best albums of 2020, No 2: Dua Lipa – Future Nostalgia For Dua Lipa, 2020 began with a puddle of tears and it ended the same way. When her second album leaked in April, the singer sobbed her way through an …
Come Away review – an indigestible lump of kid-lit stodge The second word in the title should perhaps be replaced with “off it”. Or maybe replace the first word with “go”. This is a muddled, leaden fantasy ad …
The 2020 Braddies go to … Peter Bradshaw's film picks of the year Summary: As for everyone and everything else, this has been a traumatising year for cinema. Many new movies have had to be viewed at home, on streaming service …
Not a wonderful world: why Louis Armstrong was hated by so many “I cannot think of another American artist who so failed his own talent. What went wrong?” asked one biographer of Louis Armstrong. “The sheer weight …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the US: No 2 – Soul Over the years, animation studio Pixar have patented and perfected a particular type of film: bittersweet life lessons of intense depth and emotion, w …
Pop in 2020: an escape into disco, folklore and nostalgia Pop music has the ability to be more reactive to current events than ever. Advances in technology mean that the famously swift musical responses of ro …
From Relic to The Invisible Man: the best Australian films of 2020 Summary: It’s been a tough year, hasn’t it folks – with horrific bushfires, a global pandemic and the continued existence of Pete Evans. To say the spread of c …
Could a new Dungeons & Dragons movie repeat the magic of The Lord of the Rings? It is hard to believe that Peter Jackson’s first Lord of the Rings movie, The Fellowship of the Ring, is now almost 20 years old, yet a new 4K restora …
Fiona Apple on the album of the year, Grammys hypocrisy and how #MeToo helped her get sober Summary: The album has meant so much to people this year. Did you know you had made something extraordinary? Did finishing it feel different to finishing other …
Guardian albums and tracks of 2020: how our writers voted Here’s how our writers voted: favourite choice first. Alexis Petridis, head pop and rock critic Albums Sault – Untitled (Rise) Sault – Untitled (Black …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the UK, No 1: Parasite Bong Joon-ho’s climactic Oscar triumph in February with his scabrous satire Parasite seems now like something from another era. It was maybe the film …
Reconditioning the kitchen sink: is British film emerging from its 'posh phase'? There are working-class heroes and there are unsung heroes. Take Lucy Pardee, the casting director of Rocks and Perfect 10, two of the year’s outstand …
The 50 best albums of 2020: the full list This list is drawn from votes by Guardian music critics – each critic votes for their top 20 albums, with points allocated for each placing, and those …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the UK: the full list 50 Boys State This eye-opening film looks at a role-play event to teach kids how politics works, organised by the American Legion. Here the Texas vers …
Paul McCartney expects Glastonbury 2021 to be cancelled Summary: Paul McCartney, this year’s would-be Glastonbury headliner, does not expect the festival to go ahead in 2021. The former Beatles star told BBC Radio 4 …
Gal power: is Wonder Woman 1984 the first #MeToo superhero movie? There’s a scene in Wonder Woman 1984 where the luminous Diana Prince (Gal Gadot) glides into a crowded party. Everyone is staring at her – but this is …
The 50 best films of 2020 in the US: No 1 – Nomadland In a hushed year for new releases, postponed or sent straight into the often confusing digital ether, and one that saw us all spend the majority of ou …
Chinese tech firm increases stake in Universal Music to 20% The Chinese technology company Tencent has doubled its stake in Universal Music to 20% as the streaming boom drives the world’s largest music company …
Ian McKellen got his jab – phew. Now brace for a deadly outbreak of celeb smugness It must be tough as a celebrity in the age of Covid. With all the traditional avenues of release and promotion closed, the famous have spent the last …
Classical highlights: concerts and operas to stream this Christmas Royal Opera House Christmas Concert Conducted by Mark Wigglesworth and introduced by Roderick Williams, the ROH presents a selection of numbers from f …
Streaming: the best films about unconventional Christmases Even in a year that has made us numb to strangeness, it’s been a funny old December: a festive season largely without festivities, while many will be …
The week in classical: Fidelio; Così fan tutte; Owen Wingrave; Cinderella and more Beethoven’s 250th birthday finally arrived last week. We shouldn’t mind, for his sake, that so many brilliantly planned celebrations worldwide had to …
Gorillaz: Song Machine Live from Kong review – a genre-straddling success story Little about 2020 has been straightforward. So there is something perversely logical in the prospect of Gorillaz – a half-real, half-virtual band who …
American Utopia review – David Byrne and Spike Lee burn down the house Director Spike Lee and musician David Byrne have created a crowd-pleaser with this spry concert film of Byrne’s 2018 tour turned Broadway performance. …
Gemma Arterton: ‘I feel more in control now’ Gemma Arterton was desperate as a teenager to leave her small home town in Kent to go and live in London. She remembers, in detail, the day she finall …
Wonder Woman 1984 review – the superheroine 2020 needs This long-delayed sequel to 2017’s hugely enjoyable superhero romp Wonder Woman was originally slated for release last Christmas, but it may be just t …
My perfect Christmas playlist, by Michael Kiwanuka, Sophie Ellis-Bextor and Tim Burgess Summary: Michael Kiwanuka 2020 Mercury prize winner and associate of mysterious band of the year Sault It’s been such a good year for my album, but it feels so …
Royal Opera Christmas concert review – pandemic pyjama party around the tree Curious though it may seem, the Royal Opera staged a pyjama party for its Christmas concert, the stream of which went ahead as scheduled, though tier …
Jack Harlow: That's What They All Say review – breezy confessionals Summary: Kentucky’s Jack Harlow is one of the most hyped new rappers of this year, with a No 2 single and a Grammy nod for the same song, Whats Poppin. He’s al …
Jeremy Bulloch obituary Jeremy Bulloch, who has died aged 75, was a busy character actor who staked a claim for cinematic immortality by playing the inscrutable Boba Fett in …
Cinemas shut, movies postponed: how Covid-19 upturned film in 2020 If you had money on drive-in movies making a comeback in 2020, the year’s most talked-about actor being Laurence Fox, and the biggest Hollywood hit be …
The 10 best jazz albums of 2020 10 Pat Metheny – From This Place Being both a bestselling jazz-fusion superstar and an experimental collaborator with John Zorn and Ornette Coleman ta …
A meta-masterpiece: why The Muppet Christmas Carol is the perfect festive film Forget It’s a Wonderful Life. Forget Miracle on 34th Street. Forget (please God, forget) The Holiday. There is only one definitive Christmas movie, an …
'It speaks to an ancient history': why South Africa has the world's most exciting dance music Many people got their first taste of South African dance music this year via six Angolans dancing in their backyard, dinner plates in hand. Their vira …
Can a trippy VR film bring classical music to a new generation? Summary: The two huge white trailers that sit between the Royal Palace and the Royal theatre in central Madrid form an unlikely pair of portals to a universe o …
The 10 best folk albums of 2020 10. Wu Fei and Abigail Washburn – Wu Fei and Abigail Washburn Behold the Banjo Guzheng Pickin’ Girls, as goes the title of one the many joyous collabo …
Wonder Woman 1984: the villain, the philosophy, the outfits – discuss with spoilers Director Patty Jenkins’ reunion with Gal Gadot after their 2017 runaway smash Wonder Woman has brought high expectations, but as the first comic book …
Seized review – standard-issue cross-border beat-'em-up Set in Mexico, this is about a British former special-ops warrior once known as Nero (martial-arts movie veteran Scott Adkins) endeavouring to save hi …
The 10 best global albums of 2020 10 Aquiles Navarro and Tcheser Holmes – Heritage of the Invisible II This is a heavy record in every sense. Aquiles Navarro’s synths are so guttural t …
Yellow Rose review – bittersweet tale of Filipina's quest to be a country music star Though she came to Texas as a child from the Philippines, 17-year-old Rose Garcia (played by emerging Broadway star Eva Noblezada) has been obsessed w …
One Night in Miami review – high-concept quartet of 1960s African American icons Summary: One Night in Miami is a fluent, high-minded, if sometimes slightly inert movie, with an invigorating interest in ideas and debate – and it begins with …
The Mandalorian's second season has come to an end ... but what's coming next? Did the closing episode of The Mandalorian’s second season just give us the final appearance of Mark Hamill’s Luke Skywalker in Star Wars? If so, the …
Death! Dancing! Drinking! The best movie moments of 2020 The review – Shirley During quarantine and its long, unending tail, my mind has often returned to Shirley, the psychodrama from director Josephine Dec …
The 10 best contemporary music albums of 2020 10 Brandee Younger and Dezron Douglas – Force Majeure Recorded during lockdown in the couple’s New York apartment, Force Majeure (named after the smal …
Coolie No 1 review – David Dhawan's comedy remake is bigger but not better Summary: It’s a tale of two Bollywoods this Christmas. Over at Netflix, Anurag Kashyap and Vikramaditya Motwane, representing Indian film’s modernising wing, h …
Johnny Depp 'did not get fair trial', lawyers tell appeal court Summary: Johnny Depp “did not receive a fair trial” and the high court ruling that stated he assaulted his ex-wife Amber Heard and put her in fear for her life …
We Can Be Heroes review – nutrient-free tween superhero caper For his children’s films, Robert Rodriguez long ago established his own style in strip-cartoon type graphics, garish colour schemes and affordable dig …
Peter Lamont obituary Summary: The production designer Peter Lamont, who has died aged 91, worked on every James Bond film between Goldfinger (1963), the third in the series, and Ca …
From Nitram to Penguin Bloom: Australian films to look out for in 2021 With the taste of Christmas lunch and festive beverages still lingering on our palettes, it’s time to embrace the possibilities of the new year and wa …
The Dry: the ‘devastating imagery’ bringing Jane Harper’s bestseller to the big screen Released in 2016, Jane Harper’s debut novel, The Dry, evoked a sense of sundried desperation and El Niño-inspired unease that felt as familiar to many …
The best songs of 2020 ... that you didn't hear Summary: Lily Kershaw ft Goody Grace – Now & Then I first heard Now & Then performed in a living room by a piano on a hot evening in the summer of 2019 when th …
The week in classical: AAM: Messiah; Krystian Zimerman, LSO/Rattle review – great conjunctions Aside from political tumult, this winter solstice we witnessed a rare “great conjunction” in the skies. Finding a Messiah should have been a cinch. We …
Outcry in Hollywood over Minari's placement in foreign-language category When is a film foreign-language, and when is it an American production that happens to be filmed in a language other than English? As awards season ap …
Film: Mark Kermode's 10 best of 2020 1. Saint Maud Released in October Rose Glass’s electrifying debut feature establishes the writer-director as a thrilling new voice in British cinema. …
Steve Earle and the Dukes: JT review – a father's fond farewell “It’s the only way I knew to say goodbye,” says Steve Earle of this album honouring his late son, Justin Townes Earle, a talented singer-songwriter fr …
Classical music: Fiona Maddocks's 10 best of 2020 1. Igor Levit’s livestreamed house concerts March-May In an empty room, often in socks or slippers, the Russian-born pianist’s spontaneous response to …
Fleet Foxes: A Very Lonely Solstice live stream review – all is balm Summary: Despite its billing – “a very lonely solstice” – this live stream doesn’t start lonely at all. Dressed all in white, a masked, socially distanced choi …
Soul review – Fantasia meets A Matter of Life or Death This typically ambitious Pixar animation comes on like a fever-dream cross between Disney’s Fantasia and Powell and Pressburger’s A Matter of Life and …
Music: Kitty Empire's 10 best of 2020 1. A Swayze and the Ghosts: Paid Salvation Ivy League; September The antidote to 2020 bar none: 12 tracks of guaranteed instant uplift from a bunch of …
Traffic at 20: Steven Soderbergh's bold and blistering drugs drama There’s a scene in the middle of Steven Soderbergh’s Traffic where Robert Wakefield (Michael Douglas), a conservative judge recently appointed to “dru …
Leslie West obituary Leslie West, who has died aged 75 following a cardiac arrest, could claim to be one of the creators of heavy metal. His band Mountain made a spectacul …
Wonder breaks the silence: pop, rock and classical music for 2021 Sleaford Mods – Spare Ribs The title of Sleaford Mods’ sixth album is apparently an oblique reference to the fatalities in the first wave of coronavir …
Back to Black: how the music industry reckoned with race this year “In the wake of George Floyd” is a sentence I have both read and written too many times this year. His brutal and racist killing forced an elevated co …
Dune, Bond and Top Gun reloaded: films to look out for in 2021 News of the World Paul Greengrass’s latest film is based on the western novel by Paulette Jiles, about a girl returning to her family in 1860s Texas a …
The best films of 2020 ... that you haven't seen Summary: The Grand Bizarre At the unlikely midpoint between the psychedelic visuals projected on to the wall at a rave and one of economist Naomi Klein’s essay …
Pieces of a Woman review – vehement but inauthentic childbirth drama Hungarian director Kornél Mundruczó deserves our thanks for going somewhere very few film-makers want to go: out on a limb. Many a time, his neck has …
Armando Manzanero, acclaimed Mexican music star, dies aged 85 of Covid Armando Manzanero, one of Mexico’s most revered songwriters and musical performers, has died aged 85 from Covid-19. He tested positive for the disease …
Sing Me a Song review – sombre Bhutanese internet love story Summary: In 2013, French documentary-maker Thomas Balmès made a film called Happiness, about an eight-year-old monk called Peyangki in the remote Himalayan vil …
From corruption to summer camp: the best documentaries of 2020 Collective “Plays like a thriller” can be trite when describing a documentary but in the case of Collective, Alexander Nanau’s watchful, truly galling …
'You should get one with your Covid jab': can musicals save cinema? In 2020, all bets were off. When spring came and screen after screen shut its doors, a chorus line of studios scrambled to postpone prize properties u …
'Audiences don't want white anger': how white rap grew a conscience With Jack Harlow’s major label debut Thats What They All Say selling strongly alongside a bumper deluxe version of Eminem’s Music to be Murdered By, w …
Let It Snow review – a seasonal chiller to warm fright fans' souls Summary: Nothing warms the anti-yuletide misanthropes’ shrivelled hearts like a good old-fashioned Christmas-themed horror film wherein the evil inside human s …
The Dry review – Eric Bana stars in gripping, tough and psychologically intense adaptation Jane Harper’s best-selling novel The Dry is one of those books that feels written with a feature film adaptation in mind: a genre narrative (crime mys …
Banging toons: why bands such as Bis are making soundtracks for kids' TV An architect cranks a lever, and suddenly Mr Salmonelli’s Leaning Tower of Pizza restaurant lurches to an angle. As pots and pans fly, a band slide in …
'All that mattered was survival': the songs that got us through 2020 Isaac Hayes – Going in Circles When it came to lockdown comfort listening, there was something particularly appealing about lush symphonic soul made b …
‘It took its toll’: the terrible legacy of Martin Luther King’s fight with the FBI Summary: As a child in 1960s east Harlem, documentary film-maker Sam Pollard was “profoundly touched” by two events. The assassination of John F Kennedy, in 19 …
MF Doom, iconic masked hip-hop MC, dies aged 49 MF Doom, one of US hip-hop’s most distinctive and respected MCs and producers, has died aged 49. His wife Jasmine posted on his Instagram account: The …
